<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Poetry</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="venus-and-adonis" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Venus and Adonis</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p xml:lang="la">
						<span>“Vilia miretur vulgus; mihi flavus Apollo</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pocula Castalia plena ministret aqua.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p epub:type="dedication">To the<br/>
				Right Honourable Henry Wriothesley,<br/>
				Earl of Southampton, and Baron of Titchfield.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="dedication">
					<p><b epub:type="z3998:salutation">Right Honourable</b>,</p>
					<p>I know not how I shall offend in dedicating my unpolished lines to your lordship, nor how the world will censure me for choosing so strong a prop to support so weak a burthen: only, if your honour seem but pleased, I account myself highly praised, and vow to take advantage of all idle hours, till I have honoured you with some graver labour. But if the first heir of my invention prove deformed, I shall be sorry it had so noble a godfather, and never after ear so barren a land, for fear it yield me still so bad a harvest. I leave it to your honourable survey, and your honour to your heart’s content; which I wish may always answer your own wish and the world’s hopeful expectation.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your honour’s in all duty,</p>
					<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">William Shakespeare.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>Even as the sun with purple-colour’d face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had ta’en his last leave of the weeping morn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose-cheek’d Adonis tried him to the chase;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunting he lov’d, but love he laugh’d to scorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sick-thoughted Venus makes amain unto him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And like a bold-fac’d suitor ’gins to woo him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thrice fairer than myself,” thus she began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The field’s chief flower, sweet above compare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stain to all nymphs, more lovely than a man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More white and red than doves or roses are;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nature that made thee, with herself at strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Saith that the world hath ending with thy life.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Vouchsafe, thou wonder, to alight thy steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rein his proud head to the saddle-bow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou wilt deign this favour, for thy meed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand honey secrets shalt thou know:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Here come and sit, where never serpent hisses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And being set, I’ll smother thee with kisses;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And yet not cloy thy lips with loath’d satiety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rather famish them amid their plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making them red, and pale, with fresh variety:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ten kisses short as one, one long as twenty:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">A summer’s day will seem an hour but short,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Being wasted in such time-beguiling sport.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With this she seizeth on his sweating palm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The precedent of pith and livelihood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And trembling in her passion, calls it balm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth’s sovereign salve to do a goddess good:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Being so enrag’d, desire doth lend her force</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Courageously to pluck him from his horse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Over one arm the lusty courser’s rein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under her other was the tender boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who blush’d and pouted in a dull disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With leaden appetite, unapt to toy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She red and hot as coals of glowing fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He red for shame, but frosty in desire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The studded bridle on a ragged bough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nimbly she fastens;⁠—O! how quick is love!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steed is stalled up, and even now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tie the rider she begins to prove:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Backward she push’d him, as she would be thrust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And govern’d him in strength, though not in lust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So soon was she along, as he was down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each leaning on their elbows and their hips:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now doth she stroke his cheek, now doth he frown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’gins to chide, but soon she stops his lips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And kissing speaks, with lustful language broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“If thou wilt chide, thy lips shall never open.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He burns with bashful shame, she with her tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth quench the maiden burning of his cheeks;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with her windy sighs and golden hairs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fan and blow them dry again she seeks:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He saith she is immodest, blames her miss;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">What follows more, she murders with a kiss.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even as an empty eagle, sharp by fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tires with her beak on feathers, flesh and bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaking her wings, devouring all in haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till either gorge be stuff’d or prey be gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even so she kiss’d his brow, his cheek, his chin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And where she ends she doth anew begin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forced to content, but never to obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Panting he lies, and breatheth in her face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She feedeth on the steam, as on a prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And calls it heavenly moisture, air of grace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wishing her cheeks were gardens full of flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So they were dew’d with such distilling showers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Look, how a bird lies tangled in a net,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fasten’d in her arms Adonis lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure shame and aw’d resistance made him fret,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bred more beauty in his angry eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rain added to a river that is rank</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perforce will force it overflow the bank.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still she entreats, and prettily entreats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For to a pretty ear she tunes her tale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still is he sullen, still he lours and frets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt crimson shame and anger ashy pale:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Being red, she loves him best; and being white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her best is better’d with a more delight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Look how he can, she cannot choose but love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by her fair immortal hand she swears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his soft bosom never to remove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till he take truce with her contending tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which long have rain’d, making her cheeks all wet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one sweet kiss shall pay this countless debt.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon this promise did he raise his chin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a dive-dapper peering through a wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, being look’d on, ducks as quickly in;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So offers he to give what she did crave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when her lips were ready for his pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He winks, and turns his lips another way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Never did passenger in summer’s heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More thirst for drink than she for this good turn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her help she sees, but help she cannot get;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She bathes in water, yet her fire must burn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“O, pity,” ’gan she cry, “flint-hearted boy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">’Tis but a kiss I beg; why art thou coy?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I have been woo’d as I entreat thee now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even by the stern and direful god of war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose sinewy neck in battle ne’er did bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who conquers where he comes in every jar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet hath he been my captive and my slave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And begg’d for that which thou unask’d shalt have.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Over my altars hath he hung his lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His batter’d shield, his uncontrolled crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for my sake hath learn’d to sport and dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To toy, to wanton, dally, smile, and jest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Scorning his churlish drum and ensign red</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Making my arms his field, his tent my bed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus he that overrul’d I oversway’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading him prisoner in a red rose chain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong-temper’d steel his stronger strength obey’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet was he servile to my coy disdain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O, be not proud, nor brag not of thy might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For mast’ring her that foil’d the god of fight!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Touch but my lips with those fair lips of thine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though mine be not so fair, yet are they red⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kiss shall be thine own as well as mine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What see’st thou in the ground? hold up thy head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look in mine eyeballs, there thy beauty lies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then why not lips on lips, since eyes in eyes?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Art thou ashamed to kiss? then wink again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will wink; so shall the day seem night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love keeps his revels where there are but twain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be bold to play, our sport is not in sight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">These blue-vein’d violets whereon we lean</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Never can blab, nor know not what we mean.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The tender spring upon thy tempting lip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shows thee unripe; yet mayst thou well be tasted:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make use of time, let not advantage slip;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty within itself should not be wasted:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fair flowers that are not gather’d in their prime</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Rot and consume themselves in little time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Were I hard-favour’d, foul, or wrinkled old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ill-nurtur’d, crooked, churlish, harsh in voice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’erworn, despised, rheumatic and cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thick-sighted, barren, lean, and lacking juice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then mightst thou pause, for then I were not for thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But having no defects, why dost abhor me?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou canst not see one wrinkle in my brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine eyes are grey and bright, and quick in turning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My beauty as the spring doth yearly grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My flesh is soft and plump, my marrow burning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My smooth moist hand, were it with thy hand felt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would in thy palm dissolve, or seem to melt.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bid me discourse, I will enchant thine ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, like a fairy, trip upon the green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, like a nymph, with long dishevell’d hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dance on the sands, and yet no footing seen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love is a spirit all compact of fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Not gross to sink, but light, and will aspire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Witness this primrose bank whereon I lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These forceless flowers like sturdy trees support me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two strengthless doves will draw me through the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From morn till night, even where I list to sport me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is love so light, sweet boy, and may it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That thou shouldst think it heavy unto thee?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Is thine own heart to thine own face affected?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can thy right hand seize love upon thy left?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then woo thyself, be of thyself rejected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steal thine own freedom, and complain on theft.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Narcissus so himself himself forsook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And died to kiss his shadow in the brook.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Torches are made to light, jewels to wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dainties to taste, fresh beauty for the use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herbs for their smell, and sappy plants to bear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Things growing to themselves are growth’s abuse:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Seeds spring from seeds, and beauty breedeth beauty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou wast begot; to get it is thy duty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Upon the earth’s increase why shouldst thou feed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless the earth with thy increase be fed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By law of nature thou art bound to breed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thine may live when thou thyself art dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so in spite of death thou dost survive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In that thy likeness still is left alive.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By this the love-sick queen began to sweat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For where they lay the shadow had forsook them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Titan, tired in the midday heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With burning eye did hotly overlook them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wishing Adonis had his team to guide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So he were like him and by Venus’ side.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now Adonis with a lazy spright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a heavy, dark, disliking eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His louring brows o’erwhelming his fair sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like misty vapours when they blot the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Souring his cheeks, cries, “Fie, no more of love!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sun doth burn my face; I must remove.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ay me,” quoth Venus, “young, and so unkind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What bare excuses mak’st thou to be gone!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll sigh celestial breath, whose gentle wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall cool the heat of this descending sun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I’ll make a shadow for thee of my hairs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If they burn too, I’ll quench them with my tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The sun that shines from heaven shines but warm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo I lie between that sun and thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heat I have from thence doth little harm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine eye darts forth the fire that burneth me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And were I not immortal, life were done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Between this heavenly and earthly sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Art thou obdurate, flinty, hard as steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay more than flint, for stone at rain relenteth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou a woman’s son, and canst not feel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What ’tis to love? how want of love tormenteth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O, had thy mother borne so hard a mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She had not brought forth thee, but died unkind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What am I, that thou shouldst contemn me this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or what great danger dwells upon my suit?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What were thy lips the worse for one poor kiss?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak, fair; but speak fair words, or else be mute:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Give me one kiss, I’ll give it thee again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And one for interest, if thou wilt have twain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fie, lifeless picture, cold and senseless stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well-painted idol, image dull and dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Statue contenting but the eye alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thing like a man, but of no woman bred!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thou art no man, though of a man’s complexion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For men will kiss even by their own direction.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This said, impatience chokes her pleading tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swelling passion doth provoke a pause;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red cheeks and fiery eyes blaze forth her wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being judge in love, she cannot right her cause:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now she weeps, and now she fain would speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now her sobs do her intendments break.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sometimes she shakes her head and then his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now gazeth she on him, now on the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes her arms infold him like a band:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She would, he will not in her arms be bound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And when from thence he struggles to be gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She locks her lily fingers one in one.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fondling,” she saith, “since I have hemm’d thee here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the circuit of this ivory pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll be a park, and thou shalt be my deer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feed where thou wilt, on mountain or in dale:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Graze on my lips; and if those hills be dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Stray lower, where the pleasant fountains lie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Within this limit is relief enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet bottom grass and high delightful plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round rising hillocks, brakes obscure and rough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shelter thee from tempest and from rain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then be my deer, since I am such a park;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No dog shall rouse thee, though a thousand bark.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At this Adonis smiles as in disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in each cheek appears a pretty dimple:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love made those hollows, if himself were slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might be buried in a tomb so simple;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foreknowing well, if there he came to lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Why there love lived, and there he could not die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These lovely caves, these round enchanting pits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open’d their mouths to swallow Venus’ liking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being mad before, how doth she now for wits?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck dead at first, what needs a second striking?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Poor queen of love, in thine own law forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To love a cheek that smiles at thee in scorn!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now which way shall she turn? what shall she say?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her words are done, her woes the more increasing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The time is spent, her object will away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from her twining arms doth urge releasing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Pity,” she cries; “some favour, some remorse!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Away he springs and hasteth to his horse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, lo, from forth a copse that neighbours by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A breeding jennet, lusty, young and proud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adonis’ tramping courser doth espy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth she rushes, snorts and neighs aloud:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The strong-neck’d steed, being tied unto a tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Breaketh his rein, and to her straight goes he.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Imperiously he leaps, he neighs, he bounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now his woven girths he breaks asunder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bearing earth with his hard hoof he wounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose hollow womb resounds like heaven’s thunder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The iron bit he crusheth ’tween his teeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Controlling what he was controlled with.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His ears up-prick’d; his braided hanging mane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his compass’d crest now stand on end;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His nostrils drink the air, and forth again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from a furnace, vapours doth he send:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His eye, which scornfully glisters like fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shows his hot courage and his high desire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sometime he trots, as if he told the steps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gentle majesty and modest pride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon he rears upright, curvets and leaps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As who should say, “Lo, thus my strength is tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And this I do to captivate the eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of the fair breeder that is standing by.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What recketh he his rider’s angry stir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His flattering “Holla,” or his “Stand, I say?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What cares he now for curb or pricking spur?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For rich caparisons or trappings gay?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He sees his love, and nothing else he sees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Nor nothing else with his proud sight agrees.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Look, when a painter would surpass the life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In limning out a well-proportion’d steed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His art with nature’s workmanship at strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the dead the living should exceed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So did this horse excel a common one</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In shape, in courage, colour, pace and bone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Round-hoof’d, short-jointed, fetlocks shag and long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad breast, full eye, small head, and nostril wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High crest, short ears, straight legs and passing strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thin mane, thick tail, broad buttock, tender hide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look, what a horse should have he did not lack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Save a proud rider on so proud a back.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sometimes he scuds far off, and there he stares;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon he starts at stirring of a feather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bid the wind a base he now prepares,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where he run or fly they know not whether;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For through his mane and tail the high wind sings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fanning the hairs, who wave like feather’d wings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He looks upon his love, and neighs unto her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She answers him as if she knew his mind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being proud, as females are, to see him woo her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She puts on outward strangeness, seems unkind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Spurns at his love and scorns the heat he feels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Beating his kind embracements with her heels.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then like a melancholy malcontent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He vails his tail that, like a falling plume,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cool shadow to his melting buttock lent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stamps, and bites the poor flies in his fume.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His love, perceiving how he was enraged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grew kinder, and his fury was assuaged.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His testy master goeth about to take him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, lo, the unback’d breeder, full of fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jealous of catching, swiftly doth forsake him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her the horse, and left Adonis there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As they were mad, unto the wood they hie them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Outstripping crows that strive to overfly them.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All swoln with chafing, down Adonis sits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banning his boisterous and unruly beast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the happy season once more fits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That love-sick love by pleading may be blest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For lovers say, the heart hath treble wrong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When it is barr’d the aidance of the tongue.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>An oven that is stopp’d, or river stay’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burneth more hotly, swelleth with more rage:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So of concealed sorrow may be said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free vent of words love’s fire doth assuage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when the heart’s attorney once is mute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The client breaks, as desperate in his suit.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He sees her coming, and begins to glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as a dying coal revives with wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his bonnet hides his angry brow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks on the dull earth with disturbed mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Taking no notice that she is so nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all askance he holds her in his eye.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O, what a sight it was, wistly to view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How she came stealing to the wayward boy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To note the fighting conflict of her hue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How white and red each other did destroy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now her cheek was pale, and by and by</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It flash’d forth fire, as lightning from the sky.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now was she just before him as he sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a lowly lover down she kneels;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one fair hand she heaveth up his hat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her other tender hand his fair cheek feels:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His tenderer cheek receives her soft hand’s print,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As apt as new-fall’n snow takes any dint.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O, what a war of looks was then between them!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her eyes petitioners to his eyes suing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes saw her eyes, as they had not seen them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her eyes woo’d still, his eyes disdain’d the wooing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all this dumb play had his acts made plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With tears, which, chorus-like, her eyes did rain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Full gently now she takes him by the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lily prison’d in a gaol of snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ivory in an alabaster band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So white a friend engirts so white a foe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This beauteous combat, wilful and unwilling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Show’d like two silver doves that sit a-billing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Once more the engine of her thoughts began:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O fairest mover on this mortal round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would thou wert as I am, and I a man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My heart all whole as thine, thy heart my wound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For one sweet look thy help I would assure thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though nothing but my body’s bane would cure thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Give me my hand,” saith he, “why dost thou feel it?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Give me my heart,” saith she, “and thou shalt have it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, give it me, lest thy hard heart do steel it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And being steel’d, soft sighs can never grave it:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then love’s deep groans I never shall regard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Because Adonis’ heart hath made mine hard.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For shame,” he cries, “let go, and let me go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My day’s delight is past, my horse is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ’tis your fault I am bereft him so:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pray you hence, and leave me here alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For all my mind, my thought, my busy care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is how to get my palfrey from the mare.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus she replies: “Thy palfrey as he should,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcomes the warm approach of sweet desire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affection is a coal that must be cool’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Else, suffer’d, it will set the heart on fire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The sea hath bounds, but deep desire hath none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Therefore no marvel though thy horse be gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How like a jade he stood, tied to the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Servilely master’d with a leathern rein!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he saw his love, his youth’s fair fee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He held such petty bondage in disdain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Throwing the base thong from his bending crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Enfranchising his mouth, his back, his breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who sees his true-love in her naked bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teaching the sheets a whiter hue than white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when his glutton eye so full hath fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His other agents aim at like delight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who is so faint, that dare not be so bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To touch the fire, the weather being cold?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Let me excuse thy courser, gentle boy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And learn of him, I heartily beseech thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take advantage on presented joy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I were dumb, yet his proceedings teach thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">O, learn to love; the lesson is but plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And once made perfect, never lost again.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I know not love,” quoth he, “nor will not know it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless it be a boar, and then I chase it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis much to borrow, and I will not owe it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My love to love is love but to disgrace it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For I have heard it is a life in death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That laughs and weeps, and all but with a breath.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who wears a garment shapeless and unfinish’d?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who plucks the bud before one leaf put forth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If springing things be any jot diminish’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wither in their prime, prove nothing worth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The colt that’s back’d and burden’d being young</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Loseth his pride, and never waxeth strong.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You hurt my hand with wringing; let us part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave this idle theme, this bootless chat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remove your siege from my unyielding heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love’s alarms it will not ope the gate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dismiss your vows, your feigned tears, your flattery;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For where a heart is hard they make no battery.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What! canst thou talk?” quoth she, “hast thou a tongue?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, would thou hadst not, or I had no hearing!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy mermaid’s voice hath done me double wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had my load before, now press’d with bearing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Melodious discord, heavenly tune, harsh-sounding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ear’s deep-sweet music, and heart’s deep-sore wounding.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Had I no eyes but ears, my ears would love</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That inward beauty and invisible;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or were I deaf, thy outward parts would move</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each part in me that were but sensible:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Though neither eyes nor ears, to hear nor see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet should I be in love by touching thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Say, that the sense of feeling were bereft me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that I could not see, nor hear, nor touch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing but the very smell were left me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet would my love to thee be still as much;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For from the stillitory of thy face excelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Comes breath perfumed that breedeth love by smelling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But, O, what banquet wert thou to the taste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being nurse and feeder of the other four!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would they not wish the feast might ever last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bid Suspicion double-lock the door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest Jealousy, that sour unwelcome guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Should, by his stealing in, disturb the feast?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Once more the ruby-colour’d portal open’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which to his speech did honey passage yield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a red morn, that ever yet betoken’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrack to the seaman, tempest to the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sorrow to shepherds, woe unto the birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gusts and foul flaws to herdmen and to herds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This ill presage advisedly she marketh:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as the wind is hush’d before it raineth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or as the wolf doth grin before he barketh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or as the berry breaks before it staineth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or like the deadly bullet of a gun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His meaning struck her ere his words begun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And at his look she flatly falleth down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For looks kill love and love by looks reviveth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A smile recures the wounding of a frown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But blessed bankrupt, that by love so thriveth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The silly boy, believing she is dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Claps her pale cheek, till clapping makes it red;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And all amaz’d brake off his late intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sharply he did think to reprehend her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which cunning love did wittily prevent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair fall the wit that can so well defend her!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For on the grass she lies as she were slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Till his breath breatheth life in her again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He wrings her nose, he strikes her on the cheeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bends her fingers, holds her pulses hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He chafes her lips; a thousand ways he seeks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mend the hurt that his unkindness marr’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He kisses her; and she, by her good will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Will never rise, so he will kiss her still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The night of sorrow now is turn’d to day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her two blue windows faintly she up-heaveth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the fair sun when in his fresh array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cheers the morn, and all the world relieveth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And as the bright sun glorifies the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So is her face illumin’d with her eye;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whose beams upon his hairless face are fix’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if from thence they borrow’d all their shine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were never four such lamps together mix’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not his clouded with his brow’s repine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But hers, which through the crystal tears gave light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shone like the moon in water seen by night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O, where am I?” quoth she, “in earth or heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in the ocean drench’d, or in the fire?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What hour is this? or morn or weary even?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do I delight to die, or life desire?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now I liv’d, and life was death’s annoy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But now I died, and death was lively joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O, thou didst kill me: kill me once again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy eyes’ shrewd tutor, that hard heart of thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath taught them scornful tricks, and such disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they have murder’d this poor heart of mine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And these mine eyes, true leaders to their queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But for thy piteous lips no more had seen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Long may they kiss each other for this cure!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, never let their crimson liveries wear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as they last, their verdure still endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive infection from the dangerous year!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That the star-gazers, having writ on death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May say, the plague is banish’d by thy breath.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Pure lips, sweet seals in my soft lips imprinted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What bargains may I make, still to be sealing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sell myself I can be well contented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So thou wilt buy and pay and use good dealing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which purchase if thou make, for fear of slips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Set thy seal-manual on my wax-red lips.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A thousand kisses buys my heart from me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pay them at thy leisure, one by one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is ten hundred touches unto thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are they not quickly told and quickly gone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Say, for non-payment that the debt should double,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Is twenty hundred kisses such a trouble?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fair queen,” quoth he, “if any love you owe me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Measure my strangeness with my unripe years:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before I know myself, seek not to know me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No fisher but the ungrown fry forbears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The mellow plum doth fall, the green sticks fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Or being early pluck’d, is sour to taste.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Look, the world’s comforter, with weary gait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His day’s hot task hath ended in the west;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The owl, night’s herald, shrieks, ‘’Tis very late;’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sheep are gone to fold, birds to their nest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And coal-black clouds that shadow heaven’s light</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do summon us to part, and bid good night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now let me say ‘Good night,’ and so say you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you will say so, you shall have a kiss.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Good night,” quoth she, and, ere he says “Adieu,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The honey fee of parting tender’d is:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her arms do lend his neck a sweet embrace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Incorporate then they seem; face grows to face.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Till, breathless, he disjoin’d, and backward drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heavenly moisture, that sweet coral mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose precious taste her thirsty lips well knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon they surfeit, yet complain on drouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He with her plenty press’d, she faint with dearth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their lips together glued, fall to the earth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now quick desire hath caught the yielding prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glutton-like she feeds, yet never filleth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her lips are conquerors, his lips obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paying what ransom the insulter willeth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose vulture thought doth pitch the price so high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That she will draw his lips’ rich treasure dry:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And having felt the sweetness of the spoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With blindfold fury she begins to forage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her face doth reek and smoke, her blood doth boil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And careless lust stirs up a desperate courage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Planting oblivion, beating reason back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Forgetting shame’s pure blush and honour’s wrack.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hot, faint, and weary, with her hard embracing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a wild bird being tamed with too much handling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or as the fleet-foot roe that’s tired with chasing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or like the froward infant still’d with dandling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He now obeys, and now no more resisteth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">While she takes all she can, not all she listeth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What wax so frozen but dissolves with tempering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yields at last to every light impression?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Things out of hope are compass’d oft with venturing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chiefly in love, whose leave exceeds commission:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Affection faints not like a pale-faced coward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But then woos best when most his choice is froward.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When he did frown, O, had she then gave over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such nectar from his lips she had not suck’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foul words and frowns must not repel a lover;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What though the rose have prickles, yet ’tis pluck’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Were beauty under twenty locks kept fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Yet love breaks through and picks them all at last.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For pity now she can no more detain him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The poor fool prays her that he may depart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is resolved no longer to restrain him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bids him farewell, and look well to her heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The which, by Cupid’s bow she doth protest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He carries thence encaged in his breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sweet boy,” she says, “this night I’ll waste in sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my sick heart commands mine eyes to watch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me, Love’s master, shall we meet tomorrow?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say, shall we? shall we? wilt thou make the match?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He tells her no; tomorrow he intends</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To hunt the boar with certain of his friends.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The boar!” quoth she; whereat a sudden pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like lawn being spread upon the blushing rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Usurps her cheek; she trembles at his tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his neck her yoking arms she throws:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She sinketh down, still hanging by his neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He on her belly falls, she on her back.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now is she in the very lists of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her champion mounted for the hot encounter:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All is imaginary she doth prove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will not manage her, although he mount her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That worse than Tantalus’ is her annoy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To clip Elysium and to lack her joy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even as poor birds, deceived with painted grapes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do surfeit by the eye and pine the maw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so she languisheth in her mishaps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As those poor birds that helpless berries saw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The warm effects which she in him finds missing</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She seeks to kindle with continual kissing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But all in vain; good queen, it will not be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hath assay’d as much as may be proved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her pleading hath deserv’d a greater fee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She’s Love, she loves, and yet she is not loved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Fie, fie,” he says, “you crush me; let me go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You have no reason to withhold me so.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou hadst been gone,” quoth she, “sweet boy, ere this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that thou told’st me thou wouldst hunt the boar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, be advised! thou know’st not what it is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With javelin’s point a churlish swine to gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose tushes never sheathed he whetteth still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like to a mortal butcher bent to kill.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“On his bow-back he hath a battle set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of bristly pikes, that ever threat his foes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyes like glow-worms, shine when he doth fret;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His snout digs sepulchres where’er he goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Being moved, he strikes whate’er is in his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And whom he strikes his crooked tushes slay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“His brawny sides, with hairy bristles arm’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are better proof than thy spear’s point can enter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His short thick neck cannot be easily harm’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being ireful, on the lion he will venture:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The thorny brambles and embracing bushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As fearful of him, part, through whom he rushes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alas, he naught esteems that face of thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which Love’s eyes pay tributary gazes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor thy soft hands, sweet lips and crystal eyne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose full perfection all the world amazes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But having thee at vantage⁠—wondrous dread!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would root these beauties as he roots the mead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O, let him keep his loathsome cabin still;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty hath naught to do with such foul fiends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come not within his danger by thy will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They that thrive well take counsel of their friends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When thou didst name the boar, not to dissemble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I fear’d thy fortune, and my joints did tremble.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Didst thou not mark my face? was it not white?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw’st thou not signs of fear lurk in mine eye?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew I not faint? and fell I not downright?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within my bosom, whereon thou dost lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">My boding heart pants, beats, and takes no rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But, like an earthquake, shakes thee on my breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For where Love reigns, disturbing Jealousy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth call himself Affection’s sentinel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives false alarms, suggesteth mutiny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a peaceful hour doth cry ‘Kill, kill!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Distempering gentle Love in his desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As air and water do abate the fire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This sour informer, this bate-breeding spy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This canker that eats up Love’s tender spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This carry-tale, dissentious Jealousy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sometime true news, sometime false doth bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Knocks at my heart and whispers in mine ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That if I love thee, I thy death should fear:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And more than so, presenteth to mine eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The picture of an angry-chafing boar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under whose sharp fangs on his back doth lie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An image like thyself, all stain’d with gore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whose blood upon the fresh flowers being shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Doth make them droop with grief and hang the head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What should I do, seeing thee so indeed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That tremble at the imagination?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thought of it doth make my faint heart bleed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fear doth teach it divination:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I prophesy thy death, my living sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If thou encounter with the boar tomorrow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But if thou needs wilt hunt, be ruled by me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncouple at the timorous flying hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or at the fox which lives by subtilty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or at the roe which no encounter dare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Pursue these fearful creatures o’er the downs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And on thy well-breath’d horse keep with thy hounds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And when thou hast on foot the purblind hare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mark the poor wretch, to overshoot his troubles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How he outruns the wind, and with what care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cranks and crosses with a thousand doubles:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The many musets through the which he goes</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are like a labyrinth to amaze his foes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sometime he runs among a flock of sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make the cunning hounds mistake their smell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sometime where earth-delving conies keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stop the loud pursuers in their yell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sometime sorteth with a herd of deer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Danger deviseth shifts; wit waits on fear:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For there his smell with others being mingled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hot scent-snuffing hounds are driven to doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceasing their clamorous cry, till they have singled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With much ado the cold fault cleanly out;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then do they spend their mouths: Echo replies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As if another chase were in the skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“By this, poor Wat, far off upon a hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands on his hinder legs with listening ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hearken if his foes pursue him still:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon their loud alarums he doth hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now his grief may be compared well</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To one sore sick that hears the passing bell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then shalt thou see the dew-bedabbled wretch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn, and return, indenting with the way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each envious briar his weary legs do scratch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each shadow makes him stop, each murmur stay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For misery is trodden on by many,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And being low never reliev’d by any.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lie quietly, and hear a little more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, do not struggle, for thou shalt not rise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make thee hate the hunting of the boar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unlike myself thou hear’st me moralize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Applying this to that, and so to so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For love can comment upon every woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Where did I leave?” “No matter where;” quoth he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Leave me, and then the story aptly ends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night is spent.” “Why, what of that?” quoth she.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am,” quoth he, “expected of my friends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And now ’tis dark, and going I shall fall.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“In night,” quoth she, “desire sees best of all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But if thou fall, O, then imagine this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth, in love with thee, thy footing trips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all is but to rob thee of a kiss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich preys make true men thieves; so do thy lips</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make modest Dian cloudy and forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lest she should steal a kiss and die forsworn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now of this dark night I perceive the reason:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cynthia for shame obscures her silver shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till forging nature be condemn’d of treason,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For stealing moulds from heaven, that were divine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein she framed thee, in high heaven’s despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To shame the sun by day and her by night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And therefore hath she brib’d the Destinies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cross the curious workmanship of nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mingle beauty with infirmities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pure perfection with impure defeature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Making it subject to the tyranny</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Of mad mischances and much misery;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“As burning fevers, agues pale and faint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life-poisoning pestilence and frenzies wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The marrow-eating sickness, whose attaint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disorder breeds by heating of the blood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Surfeits, imposthumes, grief, and damn’d despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Swear Nature’s death, for framing thee so fair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And not the least of all these maladies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in one minute’s fight brings beauty under:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both favour, savour, hue and qualities,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereat the impartial gazer late did wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Are on the sudden wasted, thaw’d and done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As mountain snow melts with the midday sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Therefore despite of fruitless chastity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love-lacking vestals and self-loving nuns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That on the earth would breed a scarcity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And barren dearth of daughters and of sons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Be prodigal: the lamp that burns by night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Dries up his oil to lend the world his light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What is thy body but a swallowing grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeming to bury that posterity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which by the rights of time thou needs must have,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou destroy them not in dark obscurity?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If so, the world will hold thee in disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sith in thy pride so fair a hope is slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So in thyself thyself art made away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mischief worse than civil home-bred strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or theirs whose desperate hands themselves do slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or butcher-sire that reeves his son of life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Foul cankering rust the hidden treasure frets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But gold that’s put to use more gold begets.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay then,” quoth Adon, “you will fall again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into your idle over-handled theme:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The kiss I gave you is bestow’d in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all in vain you strive against the stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For, by this black-faced night, desire’s foul nurse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Your treatise makes me like you worse and worse.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If love have lent you twenty thousand tongues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every tongue more moving than your own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bewitching like the wanton mermaid’s songs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet from mine ear the tempting tune is blown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For know, my heart stands armed in mine ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And will not let a false sound enter there;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lest the deceiving harmony should run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the quiet closure of my breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then my little heart were quite undone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his bedchamber to be barr’d of rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No, lady, no; my heart longs not to groan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But soundly sleeps, while now it sleeps alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What have you urged that I cannot reprove?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The path is smooth that leadeth on to danger:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hate not love, but your device in love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lends embracements unto every stranger.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">You do it for increase: O strange excuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">When reason is the bawd to lust’s abuse!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Call it not love, for Love to heaven is fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since sweating Lust on earth usurp’d his name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under whose simple semblance he hath fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon fresh beauty, blotting it with blame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which the hot tyrant stains and soon bereaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">As caterpillars do the tender leaves.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Love comforteth like sunshine after rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Lust’s effect is tempest after sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love’s gentle spring doth always fresh remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lust’s winter comes ere summer half be done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love surfeits not, Lust like a glutton dies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love is all truth, Lust full of forged lies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“More I could tell, but more I dare not say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The text is old, the orator too green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore, in sadness, now I will away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My face is full of shame, my heart of teen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mine ears, that to your wanton talk attended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Do burn themselves for having so offended.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With this, he breaketh from the sweet embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of those fair arms which bound him to her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And homeward through the dark laund runs apace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaves Love upon her back deeply distress’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Look, how a bright star shooteth from the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So glides he in the night from Venus’ eye.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Which after him she darts, as one on shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gazing upon a late-embarked friend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the wild waves will have him seen no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose ridges with the meeting clouds contend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So did the merciless and pitchy night</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Fold in the object that did feed her sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whereat amazed, as one that unaware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath dropp’d a precious jewel in the flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ’stonish’d as night-wanderers often are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their light blown out in some mistrustful wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even so confounded in the dark she lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Having lost the fair discovery of her way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now she beats her heart, whereat it groans,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the neighbour caves, as seeming troubled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make verbal repetition of her moans;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passion on passion deeply is redoubled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Ay me!” she cries, and twenty times “Woe, woe!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And twenty echoes twenty times cry so.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She marking them begins a wailing note,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sings extemporally a woeful ditty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How love makes young men thrall and old men dote;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How love is wise in folly, foolish-witty:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her heavy anthem still concludes in woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And still the choir of echoes answer so.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her song was tedious, and outwore the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For lovers’ hours are long, though seeming short:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If pleased themselves, others they think, delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such-like circumstance, with such-like sport:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Their copious stories oftentimes begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">End without audience and are never done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For who hath she to spend the night withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But idle sounds resembling parasites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like shrill-tongued tapsters answering every call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soothing the humour of fantastic wits?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She says, “ ’Tis so:” they answer all “ ’Tis so;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And would say after her, if she said “No.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lo, here the gentle lark, weary of rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his moist cabinet mounts up on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wakes the morning, from whose silver breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun ariseth in his majesty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who doth the world so gloriously behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That cedar-tops and hills seem burnish’d gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Venus salutes him with this fair good morrow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou clear god, and patron of all light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whom each lamp and shining star doth borrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beauteous influence that makes him bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There lives a son that suck’d an earthly mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">May lend thee light, as thou dost lend to other.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This said, she hasteth to a myrtle grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Musing the morning is so much o’erworn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet she hears no tidings of her love:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She hearkens for his hounds and for his horn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Anon she hears them chant it lustily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And all in haste she coasteth to the cry.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And as she runs, the bushes in the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some catch her by the neck, some kiss her face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some twine about her thigh to make her stay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wildly breaketh from their strict embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like a milch doe, whose swelling dugs do ache,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Hasting to feed her fawn hid in some brake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By this, she hears the hounds are at a bay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereat she starts, like one that spies an adder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wreathed up in fatal folds just in his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fear whereof doth make him shake and shudder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even so the timorous yelping of the hounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Appals her senses and her spirit confounds.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For now she knows it is no gentle chase,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the blunt boar, rough bear, or lion proud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because the cry remaineth in one place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where fearfully the dogs exclaim aloud:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Finding their enemy to be so curst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They all strain courtesy who shall cope him first.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This dismal cry rings sadly in her ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which it enters to surprise her heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, overcome by doubt and bloodless fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cold-pale weakness numbs each feeling part:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like soldiers, when their captain once doth yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They basely fly and dare not stay the field.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus stands she in a trembling ecstasy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, cheering up her senses sore dismay’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She tells them ’tis a causeless fantasy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And childish error, that they are afraid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Bids them leave quaking, bids them fear no more:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with that word she spied the hunted boar,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whose frothy mouth, bepainted all with red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like milk and blood being mingled both together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A second fear through all her sinews spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which madly hurries her she knows not whither:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This way she runs, and now she will no further,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But back retires to rate the boar for murther.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A thousand spleens bear her a thousand ways;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She treads the path that she untreads again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her more than haste is mated with delays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the proceedings of a drunken brain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Full of respects, yet nought at all respecting;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In hand with all things, nought at all effecting.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here kennell’d in a brake she finds a hound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And asks the weary caitiff for his master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there another licking of his wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Gainst venom’d sores the only sovereign plaster;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And here she meets another sadly scowling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To whom she speaks, and he replies with howling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When he hath ceas’d his ill-resounding noise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another flap-mouth’d mourner, black and grim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the welkin volleys out his voice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another and another answer him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Clapping their proud tails to the ground below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Shaking their scratch’d ears, bleeding as they go.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Look, how the world’s poor people are amazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At apparitions, signs and prodigies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon with fearful eyes they long have gazed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Infusing them with dreadful prophecies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So she at these sad sighs draws up her breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And sighing it again, exclaims on Death.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hard-favour’d tyrant, ugly, meagre, lean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hateful divorce of love,”⁠—thus chides she Death⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Grim-grinning ghost, earth’s worm, what dost thou mean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stifle beauty and to steal his breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who when he lived, his breath and beauty set</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Gloss on the rose, smell to the violet?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If he be dead⁠—O no, it cannot be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing his beauty, thou shouldst strike at it:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O yes, it may; thou hast no eyes to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hatefully at random dost thou hit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Thy mark is feeble age, but thy false dart</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Mistakes that aim, and cleaves an infant’s heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hadst thou but bid beware, then he had spoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hearing him, thy power had lost his power.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Destinies will curse thee for this stroke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bid thee crop a weed, thou pluck’st a flower:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Love’s golden arrow at him should have fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And not Death’s ebon dart, to strike him dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dost thou drink tears, that thou provokest such weeping?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What may a heavy groan advantage thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why hast thou cast into eternal sleeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those eyes that taught all other eyes to see?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Now Nature cares not for thy mortal vigour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Since her best work is ruin’d with thy rigour.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here overcome, as one full of despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She vail’d her eyelids, who, like sluices, stopt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crystal tide that from her two cheeks fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sweet channel of her bosom dropt;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But through the flood-gates breaks the silver rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And with his strong course opens them again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O, how her eyes and tears did lend and borrow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her eyes seen in the tears, tears in her eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both crystals, where they view’d each other’s sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorrow that friendly sighs sought still to dry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But like a stormy day, now wind, now rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sighs dry her cheeks, tears make them wet again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Variable passions throng her constant woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As striving who should best become her grief;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All entertain’d, each passion labours so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That every present sorrow seemeth chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But none is best: then join they all together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like many clouds consulting for foul weather.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By this, far off she hears some huntsman hollo;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A nurse’s song ne’er pleas’d her babe so well:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dire imagination she did follow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sound of hope doth labour to expel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For now reviving joy bids her rejoice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And flatters her it is Adonis’ voice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whereat her tears began to turn their tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being prison’d in her eye like pearls in glass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet sometimes falls an orient drop beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which her cheek melts, as scorning it should pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wash the foul face of the sluttish ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who is but drunken when she seemeth drown’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O hard-believing love, how strange it seems</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to believe, and yet too credulous!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy weal and woe are both of them extremes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despair and hope make thee ridiculous:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The one doth flatter thee in thoughts unlikely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">In likely thoughts the other kills thee quickly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now she unweaves the web that she hath wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adonis lives, and Death is not to blame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not she that call’d him all to naught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now she adds honours to his hateful name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She clepes him king of graves and grave for kings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Imperious supreme of all mortal things.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No, no,” quoth she, “sweet Death, I did but jest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet pardon me I felt a kind of fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whenas I met the boar, that bloody beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which knows no pity, but is still severe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Then, gentle shadow⁠—truth I must confess⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">I rail’d on thee, fearing my love’s decease.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Tis not my fault: the boar provok’d my tongue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be wreak’d on him, invisible commander;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis he, foul creature, that hath done thee wrong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did but act, he’s author of my slander:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Grief hath two tongues, and never woman yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Could rule them both, without ten women’s wit.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus hoping that Adonis is alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her rash suspect she doth extenuate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that his beauty may the better thrive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Death she humbly doth insinuate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Tells him of trophies, statues, tombs, and stories</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His victories, his triumphs and his glories.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Jove,” quoth she, “how much a fool was I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be of such a weak and silly mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wail his death who lives and must not die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till mutual overthrow of mortal kind!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For he being dead, with him is beauty slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And beauty dead, black Chaos comes again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fie, fie, fond love, thou art so full of fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one with treasure laden, hemm’d with thieves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trifles, unwitnessed with eye or ear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy coward heart with false bethinking grieves.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Even at this word she hears a merry horn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Whereat she leaps that was but late forlorn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As falcon to the lure, away she flies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The grass stoops not, she treads on it so light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in her haste unfortunately spies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foul boar’s conquest on her fair delight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which seen, her eyes, as murder’d with the view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Like stars ashamed of day, themselves withdrew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or, as the snail, whose tender horns being hit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrinks backwards in his shelly cave with pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there all smother’d up, in shade doth sit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long after fearing to creep forth again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So, at his bloody view, her eyes are fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Into the deep dark cabins of her head:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Where they resign their office and their light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the disposing of her troubled brain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who bids them still consort with ugly night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never wound the heart with looks again;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Who like a king perplexed in his throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">By their suggestion gives a deadly groan,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whereat each tributary subject quakes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when the wind, imprison’d in the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struggling for passage, earth’s foundation shakes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which with cold terror doth men’s minds confound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">This mutiny each part doth so surprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That from their dark beds once more leap her eyes;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, being open’d, threw unwilling light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the wide wound that the boar had trench’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his soft flank; whose wonted lily white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With purple tears, that his wound wept, was drench’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">No flower was nigh, no grass, herb, leaf, or weed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But stole his blood and seem’d with him to bleed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This solemn sympathy poor Venus noteth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over one shoulder doth she hang her head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dumbly she passions, franticly she doteth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She thinks he could not die, he is not dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her voice is stopt, her joints forget to bow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Her eyes are mad that they have wept till now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon his hurt she looks so steadfastly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That her sight dazzling makes the wound seem three;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then she reprehends her mangling eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That makes more gashes where no breach should be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">His face seems twain, each several limb is doubled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">For oft the eye mistakes, the brain being troubled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My tongue cannot express my grief for one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet,” quoth she, “behold two Adons dead!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sighs are blown away, my salt tears gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine eyes are turn’d to fire, my heart to lead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Heavy heart’s lead, melt at mine eyes’ red fire!</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">So shall I die by drops of hot desire.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alas poor world, what treasure hast thou lost!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What face remains alive that’s worth the viewing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose tongue is music now? what canst thou boast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of things long since, or anything ensuing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The flowers are sweet, their colours fresh and trim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But true-sweet beauty lived and died with him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bonnet nor veil henceforth no creature wear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor sun nor wind will ever strive to kiss you:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having no fair to lose, you need not fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun doth scorn you and the wind doth hiss you:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">But when Adonis lived, sun and sharp air</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Lurk’d like two thieves, to rob him of his fair:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And therefore would he put his bonnet on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under whose brim the gaudy sun would peep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wind would blow it off and, being gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play with his locks: then would Adonis weep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And straight, in pity of his tender years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They both would strive who first should dry his tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To see his face the lion walk’d along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind some hedge, because he would not fear him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To recreate himself when he hath sung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tiger would be tame and gently hear him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he had spoke, the wolf would leave his prey</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And never fright the silly lamb that day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When he beheld his shadow in the brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fishes spread on it their golden gills;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he was by, the birds such pleasure took,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That some would sing, some other in their bills</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Would bring him mulberries and ripe-red cherries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He fed them with his sight, they him with berries.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But this foul, grim, and urchin-snouted boar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose downward eye still looketh for a grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er saw the beauteous livery that he wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Witness the entertainment that he gave:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">If he did see his face, why then I know</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">He thought to kiss him, and hath kill’d him so.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Tis true, ’tis true; thus was Adonis slain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ran upon the boar with his sharp spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who did not whet his teeth at him again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But by a kiss thought to persuade him there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And nuzzling in his flank, the loving swine</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sheathed unaware the tusk in his soft groin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Had I been tooth’d like him, I must confess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With kissing him I should have kill’d him first;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he is dead, and never did he bless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My youth with his; the more am I accurst.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">With this, she falleth in the place she stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And stains her face with his congealed blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She looks upon his lips, and they are pale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She takes him by the hand, and that is cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She whispers in his ears a heavy tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if they heard the woeful words she told;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She lifts the coffer-lids that close his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Where, lo, two lamps, burnt out, in darkness lies;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Two glasses, where herself herself beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand times, and now no more reflect;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their virtue lost, wherein they late excell’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every beauty robb’d of his effect:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">“Wonder of time,” quoth she, “this is my spite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That, thou being dead, the day should yet be light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Since thou art dead, lo, here I prophesy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorrow on love hereafter shall attend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shall be waited on with jealousy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find sweet beginning, but unsavoury end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Ne’er settled equally, but high or low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">That all love’s pleasure shall not match his woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It shall be fickle, false and full of fraud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bud and be blasted in a breathing-while;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bottom poison, and the top o’erstraw’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sweets that shall the truest sight beguile:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">The strongest body shall it make most weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Strike the wise dumb and teach the fool to speak.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It shall be sparing, and too full of riot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teaching decrepit age to tread the measures;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The staring ruffian shall it keep in quiet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pluck down the rich, enrich the poor with treasures;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">It shall be raging-mad, and silly-mild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Make the young old, the old become a child.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It shall suspect where is no cause of fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shall not fear where it should most mistrust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shall be merciful, and too severe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And most deceiving when it seems most just;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Perverse it shall be, where it shows most toward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Put fear to valour, courage to the coward.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It shall be cause of war and dire events,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set dissension ’twixt the son and sire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Subject and servile to all discontents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As dry combustious matter is to fire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Sith in his prime Death doth my love destroy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">They that love best their love shall not enjoy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By this, the boy that by her side lay kill’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was melted like a vapour from her sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his blood that on the ground lay spill’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A purple flower sprung up, chequer’d with white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Resembling well his pale cheeks and the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Which in round drops upon their whiteness stood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She bows her head, the new-sprung flower to smell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comparing it to her Adonis’ breath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And says within her bosom it shall dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since he himself is reft from her by death:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">She crops the stalk, and in the breach appears</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Green-dropping sap, which she compares to tears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Poor flower,” quoth she, “this was thy father’s guise⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet issue of a more sweet-smelling sire⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every little grief to wet his eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To grow unto himself was his desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">And so ’tis thine; but know, it is as good</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">To wither in my breast as in his blood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Here was thy father’s bed, here in my breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art the next of blood, and ’tis thy right:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, in this hollow cradle take thy rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My throbbing heart shall rock thee day and night:</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">There shall not be one minute in an hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Wherein I will not kiss my sweet love’s flower.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus weary of the world, away she hies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yokes her silver doves; by whose swift aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their mistress mounted through the empty skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her light chariot quickly is convey’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Holding their course to Paphos, where their queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span class="i1">Means to immure herself and not be seen.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-rape-of-lucrece">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Rape of Lucrece</h2>
				<p epub:type="dedication">To the<br/>
				Right Honourable Henry Wriothesly,<br/>
				Earl of Southampton, and Baron of Titchfield.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="dedication">
					<p>The love I dedicate to your Lordship is without end; whereof this pamphlet, without beginning, is but a superfluous moiety. The warrant I have of your honourable disposition, not the worth of my untutored lines, makes it assured of acceptance. What I have done is yours; what I have to do is yours; being part in all I have, devoted yours. Were my worth greater, my duty would show greater; meantime, as it is, it is bound to your Lordship, to whom I wish long life, still lengthened with all happiness.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your Lordship’s in all duty,</p>
					<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">William Shakespeare.</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="the-rape-of-lucrece-argument" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Argument</h3>
				<p>Lucius Tarquinius, for his excessive pride surnamed Superbus, after he had caused his own father-in-law, Servius Tullius, to be cruelly murdered, and, contrary to the Roman laws and customs, not requiring or staying for the people’s suffrages, had possessed himself of the kingdom, went, accompanied with his sons and other noblemen of Rome, to besiege Ardea. During which siege the principal men of the army meeting one evening at the tent of Sextus Tarquinius, the king’s son, in their discourses after supper, everyone commended the virtues of his own wife; among whom Collatinus extolled the incomparable chastity of his wife Lucretia. In that pleasant humour they all posted to Rome; and intending, by their secret and sudden arrival, to make trial of that which everyone had before avouched, only Collatinus finds his wife, though it were late in the night, spinning amongst her maids: the other ladies were all found dancing and revelling, or in several disports. Whereupon the noblemen yielded Collatinus the victory, and his wife the fame. At that time Sextus Tarquinius being inflamed with Lucrece’s beauty, yet smothering his passions for the present, departed with the rest back to the camp; from whence he shortly after privily withdrew himself, and was, according to his estate, royally entertained and lodged by Lucrece at Collatium. The same night he treacherously stealeth into her chamber, violently ravished her, and early in the morning speedeth away. Lucrece, in this lamentable plight, hastily dispatched messengers, one to Rome for her father, another to the camp for Collatine. They came, the one accompanied with Junius Brutus, the other with Publius Valerius; and finding Lucrece attired in mourning habit, demanded the cause of her sorrow. She, first taking an oath of them for her revenge, revealed the actor, and whole manner of his dealing, and withal suddenly stabbed herself. Which done, with one consent they all vowed to root out the whole hated family of the Tarquins; and bearing the dead body to Rome, Brutus acquainted the people with the doer and manner of the vile deed, with a bitter invective against the tyranny of the king; wherewith the people were so moved, that with one consent and a general acclamation the Tarquins were all exiled, and the state government changed from kings to consuls.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-rape-of-lucrece-poem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>From the besieged Ardea all in post,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Borne by the trustless wings of false desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to Collatium bears the lightless fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And girdle with embracing flames the waist</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Collatine’s fair love, Lucrece the chaste.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Haply that name of “chaste” unhappily set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This bateless edge on his keen appetite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Collatine unwisely did not let</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To praise the clear unmatched red and white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which triumph’d in that sky of his delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven’s beauties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With pure aspects did him peculiar duties.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For he the night before, in Tarquin’s tent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlock’d the treasure of his happy state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the possession of his beauteous mate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reckoning his fortune at such high-proud rate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That kings might be espoused to more fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But king nor peer to such a peerless dame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O happiness enjoy’d but of a few!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if possess’d, as soon decay’d and done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is the morning’s silver-melting dew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the golden splendour of the sun!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An expired date, cancell’d ere well begun:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Honour and beauty, in the owner’s arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are weakly fortress’d from a world of harms.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beauty itself doth of itself persuade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eyes of men without an orator;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What needeth then apologies be made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To set forth that which is so singular?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or why is Collatine the publisher</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that rich jewel he should keep unknown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From thievish ears, because it is his own?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Perchance his boast of Lucrece’ sovereignty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suggested this proud issue of a king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance that envy of so rich a thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Braving compare, disdainfully did sting</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His high-pitch’d thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That golden hap which their superiors want.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But some untimely thought did instigate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His all-too-timeless speed, if none of those:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neglected all, with swift intent he goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To quench the coal which in his liver glows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O rash false heat, wrapp’d in repentant cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy hasty spring still blasts, and ne’er grows old!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When at Collatium this false lord arriv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well was he welcom’d by the Roman dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within whose face beauty and virtue striv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which of them both should underprop her fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When virtue bragg’d, beauty would blush for shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When beauty boasted blushes, in despite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtue would stain that o’er with silver white.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But beauty, in that white intituled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Venus’ doves doth challenge that fair field:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then virtue claims from beauty beauty’s red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which virtue gave the golden age, to gild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their silver cheeks, and call’d it then their shield;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Teaching them thus to use it in the fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When shame assail’d, the red should fence the white.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This heraldry in Lucrece’ face was seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Argued by beauty’s red and virtue’s white:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of either’s colour was the other queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proving from world’s minority their right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet their ambition makes them still to fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sovereignty of either being so great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That oft they interchange each other’s seat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their silent war of lilies and of roses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Tarquin view’d in her fair face’s field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, lest between them both it should be kill’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coward captive vanquish’d doth yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To those two armies that would let him go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather than triumph in so false a foe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now thinks he that her husband’s shallow tongue⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The niggard prodigal that prais’d her so⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that high task hath done her beauty wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which far exceeds his barren skill to show:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This earthly saint, adored by this devil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little suspecteth the false worshipper;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For unstain’d thoughts do seldom dream on evil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Birds never limed no secret bushes fear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So guiltless she securely gives good cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And reverend welcome to her princely guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose inward ill no outward harm express’d:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For that he colour’d with his high estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hiding base sin in plaits of majesty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That nothing in him seem’d inordinate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save sometime too much wonder of his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, having all, all could not satisfy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, cloy’d with much, he pineth still for more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she, that never coped with stranger eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could pick no meaning from their parling looks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor read the subtle-shining secrecies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writ in the glassy margents of such books:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She touch’d no unknown baits, nor fear’d no hooks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor could she moralize his wanton sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than his eyes were open’d to the light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He stories to her ears her husband’s fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Won in the fields of fruitful Italy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And decks with praises Collatine’s high name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made glorious by his manly chivalry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bruised arms and wreaths of victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her joy with heav’d-up hand she doth express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, wordless, so greets heaven for his success.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Far from the purpose of his coming hither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He makes excuses for his being there:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No cloudy show of stormy blustering weather</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till sable Night, mother of Dread and Fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the world dim darkness doth display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in her vaulty prison stows the Day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intending weariness with heavy spright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, after supper, long he questioned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now leaden slumber with life’s strength doth fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everyone to rest themselves betake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save thieves, and cares, and troubled minds, that wake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sundry dangers of his will’s obtaining;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet ever to obtain his will resolving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when great treasure is the meed proposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though death be adjunct, there’s no death supposed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Those that much covet are with gain so fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what they have not, that which they possess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They scatter and unloose it from their bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so, by hoping more, they have but less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, gaining more, the profit of excess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rich gain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The aim of all is but to nurse the life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this aim there is such thwarting strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one for all, or all for one we gage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As life for honour in fell battle’s rage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The death of all, and all together lost.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So that in vent’ring ill we leave to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The things we are, for that which we expect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this ambitious foul infirmity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In having much, torments us with defect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that we have: so then we do neglect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The thing we have; and, all for want of wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make something nothing, by augmenting it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pawning his honour to obtain his lust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for himself himself he must forsake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When shall he think to find a stranger just,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he himself himself confounds, betrays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To slanderous tongues and wretched hateful days?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now stole upon the time the dead of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No comfortable star did lend his light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No noise but owls’ and wolves’ death-boding cries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now serves the season that they may surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The silly lambs; pure thoughts are dead and still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While lust and murder wake to stain and kill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now this lustful lord leap’d from his bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throwing his mantle rudely o’er his arm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is madly toss’d between desire and dread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ one sweetly flatters, th’ other feareth harm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But honest fear, bewitch’d with lust’s foul charm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth too too oft betake him to retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beaten away by brain-sick rude desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the flame thus speaks advisedly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“As from this cold flint I enforced this fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Lucrece must I force to my desire.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here pale with fear he doth premeditate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dangers of his loathsome enterprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his inward mind he doth debate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What following sorrow may on this arise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then looking scornfully, he doth despise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His naked armour of still-slaughter’d lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To darken her whose light excelleth thine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And die, unhallow’d thoughts, before you blot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With your uncleanness that which is divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let fair humanity abhor the deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That spots and stains love’s modest snow-white weed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O shame to knighthood and to shining arms!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O foul dishonour to my household’s grave!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O impious act, including all foul harms!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A martial man to be soft fancy’s slave!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True valour still a true respect should have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then my digression is so vile, so base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That it will live engraven in my face.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be an eye-sore in my golden coat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cipher me how fondly I did dote;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That my posterity, sham’d with the note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wish that I their father had not been.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What win I, if I gain the thing I seek?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who buys a minute’s mirth to wail a week?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or sells eternity to get a toy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“If Collatinus dream of my intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will he not wake, and in a desperate rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This siege that hath engirt his marriage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This dying virtue, this surviving shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O, what excuse can my invention make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eyes forego their light, my false heart bleed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But coward-like with trembling terror die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Had Collatinus kill’d my son or sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or lain in ambush to betray my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or were he not my dear friend, this desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might have excuse to work upon his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in revenge or quittal of such strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Shameful it is; ay, if the fact be known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hateful it is; there is no hate in loving:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll beg her love; but she is not her own:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worst is but denial and reproving:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My will is strong, past reason’s weak removing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who fears a sentence or an old man’s saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, graceless, holds he disputation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with good thoughts makes dispensation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Urging the worser sense for vantage still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in a moment doth confound and kill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All pure effects, and doth so far proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Quoth he, “She took me kindly by the hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gaz’d for tidings in my eager eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fearing some hard news from the warlike band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where her beloved Collatinus lies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, how her fear did make her colour rise!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First red as roses that on lawn we lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then white as lawn, the roses took away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And how her hand, in my hand being lock’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forced it to tremble with her loyal fear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which struck her sad, and then it faster rock’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until her husband’s welfare she did hear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That had Narcissus seen her as she stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Self-love had never drown’d him in the flood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Why hunt I then for colour or excuses?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All orators are dumb when beauty pleadeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affection is my captain, and he leadeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when his gaudy banner is display’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The coward fights and will not be dismay’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then, childish fear, avaunt! debating, die!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Respect and reason wait on wrinkled age!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart shall never countermand mine eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad pause and deep regard beseem the sage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My part is youth, and beats these from the stage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As corn o’ergrown by weeds, so heedful fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is almost chok’d by unresisted lust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away he steals with opening, listening ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of foul hope, and full of fond mistrust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both which, as servitors to the unjust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So cross him with their opposite persuasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That now he vows a league, and now invasion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Within his thought her heavenly image sits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the self-same seat sits Collatine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That eye which looks on her confounds his wits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That eye which him beholds, as more divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto a view so false will not incline;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which once corrupted takes the worser part;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And therein heartens up his servile powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, flatter’d by their leader’s jocund show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as their captain, so their pride doth grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paying more slavish tribute than they owe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By reprobate desire thus madly led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece’ bed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The locks between her chamber and his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each one by him enforc’d retires his ward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as they open they all rate his ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which drives the creeping thief to some regard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The threshold grates the door to have him heard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Night-wandering weasels shriek to see him there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As each unwilling portal yields him way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through little vents and crannies of the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wind wars with his torch, to make him stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blows the smoke of it into his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extinguishing his conduct in this case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And being lighted, by the light he spies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lucretia’s glove, wherein her needle sticks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He takes it from the rushes where it lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And griping it, the needle his finger pricks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As who should say “This glove to wanton tricks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not inured; return again in haste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou see’st our mistress’ ornaments are chaste.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in the worst sense construes their denial:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The doors, the wind, the glove, that did delay him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He takes for accidental things of trial;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with a lingering stay his course doth let,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till every minute pays the hour his debt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So, so,” quoth he, “these lets attend the time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To add a more rejoicing to the prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pain pays the income of each precious thing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now is he come unto the chamber door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shuts him from the heaven of his thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with a yielding latch, and with no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath barr’d him from the blessed thing he sought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So from himself impiety hath wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for his prey to pray he doth begin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the heavens should countenance his sin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having solicited the eternal power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they would stand auspicious to the hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even there he starts: quoth he, “I must de-flower:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How can they then assist me in the act?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My will is back’d with resolution:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blackest sin is clear’d with absolution;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against love’s fire fear’s frost hath dissolution.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The eye of heaven is out, and misty night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This said, his guilty hand pluck’d up the latch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his knee the door he opens wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus treason works ere traitors be espied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Into the chamber wickedly he stalks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gazeth on her yet unstained bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curtains being close, about he walks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By their high treason is his heart misled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Look, as the fair and fiery-pointed sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wink, being blinded with a greater light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether it is that she reflects so bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O, had they in that darksome prison died!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then had they seen the period of their ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Collatine again by Lucrece’ side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his clear bed might have reposed still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they must ope, this blessed league to kill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must sell her joy, her life, her world’s delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swelling on either side to want his bliss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between whose hills her head entombed is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, like a virtuous monument, she lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be admired of lewd unhallow’d eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Without the bed her other fair hand was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the green coverlet; whose perfect white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show’d like an April daisy on the grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pearly sweat, resembling dew of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And canopied in darkness sweetly lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till they might open to adorn the day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her hair, like golden threads, play’d with her breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O modest wantons! wanton modesty!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showing life’s triumph in the map of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And death’s dim look in life’s mortality:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each in her sleep themselves so beautify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if between them twain there were no strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that life liv’d in death, and death in life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her breasts, like ivory globes circled with blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pair of maiden worlds unconquered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him by oath they truly honoured.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, like a foul usurper, went about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From this fair throne to heave the owner out.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What could he see but mightily he noted?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What did he note but strongly he desired?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his will his wilful eye he tired.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With more than admiration he admired</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As the grim lion fawneth o’er his prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So o’er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rage of lust by grazing qualified;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slack’d, not suppress’d; for standing by her side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In bloody death and ravishment delighting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor children’s tears nor mothers’ groans respecting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eye commends the leading to his hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hand, as proud of such a dignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smoking with pride, march’d on to make his stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On her bare breast, the heart of all her land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left their round turrets destitute and pale.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They, mustering to the quiet cabinet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where their dear governess and lady lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do tell her she is dreadfully beset,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fright her with confusion of their cries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, much amaz’d, breaks ope her lock’d-up eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are by his flaming torch dimm’d and controll’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Imagine her as one in dead of night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose grim aspect sets every joint a shaking:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What terror ’tis! but she, in worser taking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sight which makes supposed terror true.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wrapp’d and confounded in a thousand fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a new-kill’d bird she trembling lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such shadows are the weak brain’s forgeries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His hand, that yet remains upon her breast⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May feel her heart⁠—poor citizen⁠—distress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This moves in him more rage, and lesser pity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make the breach and enter this sweet city.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>First, like a trumpet, doth his tongue begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sound a parley to his heartless foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who o’er the white sheet peers her whiter chin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reason of this rash alarm to know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he by dumb demeanour seeks to show;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But she with vehement prayers urgeth still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under what colour he commits this ill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus he replies: “The colour in thy face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even for anger makes the lily pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the red rose blush at her own disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under that colour am I come to scale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy never-conquer’d fort: the fault is thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thou with patience must my will abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My will that marks thee for my earth’s delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I to conquer sought with all my might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But as reproof and reason beat it dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By thy bright beauty was it newly bred.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I see what crosses my attempt will bring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know what thorns the growing rose defends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think the honey guarded with a sting;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All this, beforehand, counsel comprehends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But will is deaf, and hears no heedful friends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dotes on what he looks, ’gainst law or duty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I have debated, even in my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But nothing can Affection’s course control,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or stop the headlong fury of his speed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know repentant tears ensue the deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet strike I to embrace mine infamy.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, like a falcon towering in the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coucheth the fowl below with his wings’ shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose crooked beak threats if he mount he dies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So under his insulting falchion lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcon’s bells.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Lucrece,” quoth he, “this night I must enjoy thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou deny, then force must work my way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That done, some worthless slave of thine I’ll slay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To kill thine honour with thy life’s decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So thy surviving husband shall remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scornful mark of every open eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy issue blurr’d with nameless bastardy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, the author of their obloquy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sung by children in succeeding times.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fault unknown is as a thought unacted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little harm, done to a great good end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For lawful policy remains enacted.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poisonous simple sometimes is compacted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a pure compound; being so applied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His venom in effect is purified.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then, for thy husband and thy children’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tender my suit: bequeath not to their lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shame that from them no device can take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blemish that will never be forgot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worse than a slavish wipe, or birth-hour’s blot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For marks descried in men’s nativity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are nature’s faults, not their own infamy.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here with a cockatrice’ dead-killing eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rouseth up himself and makes a pause;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While she, the picture of pure piety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a white hind under the grype’s sharp claws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleads in a wilderness where are no laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the rough beast that knows no gentle right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when a black-fac’d cloud the world doth threat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his dim mist the aspiring mountains hiding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From earth’s dark womb some gentle gust doth get,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which blows these pitchy vapours from their biding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hindering their present fall by this dividing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So his unhallow’d haste her words delays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, foul night-working cat, he doth but dally,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sad behaviour feeds his vulture folly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No penetrable entrance to her plaining:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fix’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the remorseless wrinkles of his face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her modest eloquence with sighs is mix’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to her oratory adds more grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She puts the period often from his place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And midst the sentence so her accent breaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She conjures him by high almighty Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship’s oath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By her untimely tears, her husband’s love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By holy human law, and common troth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By heaven and earth, and all the power of both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to his borrow’d bed he make retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stoop to honour, not to foul desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Quoth she, “Reward not hospitality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such black payment as thou hast pretended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mar not the thing that cannot be amended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>End thy ill aim before the shoot be ended:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He is no woodman that doth bend his bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To strike a poor unseasonable doe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My husband is thy friend; for his sake spare me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself art mighty; for thine own sake leave me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself a weakling; do not then ensnare me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou look’st not like deceit; do not deceive me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sighs, like whirlwinds, labour hence to heave thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If ever man were moved with woman’s moans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“All which together, like a troubled ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beat at thy rocky and wreck-threatening heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To soften it with their continual motion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For stones dissolved to water do convert.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, if no harder than a stone thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Melt at my tears, and be compassionate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soft pity enters at an iron gate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In Tarquin’s likeness I did entertain thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all the host of heaven I complain me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wrong’st his honour, wound’st his princely name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art not what thou seem’st; and if the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou seem’st not what thou art, a god, a king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For kings like gods should govern everything.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“How will thy shame be seeded in thine age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thus thy vices bud before thy spring!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in thy hope thou darest do such outrage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What darest thou not when once thou art a king?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, be remember’d, no outrageous thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From vassal actors can he wiped away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then kings’ misdeeds cannot be hid in clay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This deed will make thee only lov’d for fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But happy monarchs still are fear’d for love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With foul offenders thou perforce must bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they in thee the like offences prove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If but for fear of this, thy will remove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For princes are the glass, the school, the book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where subjects’ eyes do learn, do read, do look.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must he in thee read lectures of such shame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt thou be glass, wherein it shall discern</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Authority for sin, warrant for blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To privilege dishonour in thy name?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou back’st reproach against long-living laud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mak’st fair reputation but a bawd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From a pure heart command thy rebel will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it was lent thee all that brood to kill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy princely office how canst thou fulfill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When, pattern’d by thy fault, foul sin may say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He learn’d to sin, and thou didst teach the way?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Think but how vile a spectacle it were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To view thy present trespass in another.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men’s faults do seldom to themselves appear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their own transgressions partially they smother:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, how are they wrapp’d in with infamies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from their own misdeeds askance their eyes!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To thee, to thee, my heaved-up hands appeal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sue for exiled majesty’s repeal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him return, and flattering thoughts retire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His true respect will prison false desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou shalt see thy state and pity mine.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Have done,” quoth he: “my uncontrolled tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turns not, but swells the higher by this let.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the wind in greater fury fret:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The petty streams that pay a daily debt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls’ haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou art,” quoth she, “a sea, a sovereign king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If all these petty ills shall change thy good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy sea within a puddle’s womb is hearsed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou nobly base, they basely dignified;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lesser thing should not the greater hide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cedar stoops not to the base shrub’s foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But low shrubs whither at the cedar’s root.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state⁠—”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No more,” quoth he; “by heaven, I will not hear thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yield to my love; if not, enforced hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of love’s coy touch, shall rudely tear thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the base bed of some rascal groom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be thy partner in this shameful doom.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This said, he sets his foot upon the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For light and lust are deadly enemies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shame folded up in blind concealing night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wolf hath seized his prey, the poor lamb cries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till with her own white fleece her voice controll’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entombs her outcry in her lips’ sweet fold:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For with the nightly linen that she wears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He pens her piteous clamours in her head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spots whereof could weeping purify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her tears should drop on them perpetually.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she hath lost a dearer thing than life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he hath won what he would lose again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This forced league doth force a further strife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This momentary joy breeds months of pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This hot desire converts to cold disdain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pure Chastity is rifled of her store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Look, as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prey wherein by nature they delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His taste delicious, in digestion souring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Devours his will, that lived by foul devouring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O, deeper sin than bottomless conceit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can comprehend in still imagination!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drunken Desire must vomit his receipt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere he can see his own abomination.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Lust is in his pride no exclamation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can curb his heat, or rein his rash desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till, like a jade, Self-will himself doth tire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And then with lank and lean discolour’d cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeble Desire, all recreant, poor, and meek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a bankrupt beggar wails his case:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flesh being proud, Desire doth fight with Grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For there it revels; and when that decays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The guilty rebel for remission prays.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who this accomplishment so hotly chased;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For now against himself he sounds this doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That through the length of times he stands disgraced:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, his soul’s fair temple is defaced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ask the spotted princess how she fares.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She says, her subjects with foul insurrection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have batter’d down her consecrated wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by their mortal fault brought in subjection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her immortality, and made her thrall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To living death, and pain perpetual:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in her prescience she controlled still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But her foresight could not forestall their will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even in this thought through the dark night he stealeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A captive victor that hath lost in gain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scar that will, despite of cure, remain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving his spoil perplex’d in greater pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She hears the load of lust he left behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he the burthen of a guilty mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She like a wearied lamb lies panting there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He scowls, and hates himself for his offence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He faintly flies, sweating with guilty fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She stays, exclaiming on the direful night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He runs, and chides his vanish’d, loathed delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He thence departs a heavy convertite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She there remains a hopeless castaway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in his speed looks for the morning light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She prays she never may behold the day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“For day,” quoth she, “night’s scapes doth open lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my true eyes have never practised how</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cloak offences with a cunning brow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“They think not but that every eye can see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same disgrace which they themselves behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore would they still in darkness be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have their unseen sin remain untold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they their guilt with weeping will unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grave, like water that doth eat in steel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here she exclaims against repose and rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wakes her heart by beating on her breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bids it leap from thence, where it may find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some purer chest, to close so pure a mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the unseen secrecy of night:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O comfort-killing Night, image of hell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dim register and notary of shame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black stage for tragedies and murders fell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vast sin-concealing chaos! nurse of blame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blind muffled bawd! dark harbour for defame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grim cave of death! whispering conspirator</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With close-tongued treason and the ravisher!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O hateful, vaporous, and foggy Night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make war against proportion’d course of time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“With rotten damps ravish the morning air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The life of purity, the supreme fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere he arrive his weary noon-tide prick;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let thy misty vapours march so thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in their smoky ranks his smother’d light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May set at noon and make perpetual night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Were Tarquin Night, as he is but Night’s child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silver-shining queen he would distain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through Night’s black bosom should not peep again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So should I have co-partners in my pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As palmers’ chat makes short their pilgrimage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Where now I have no one to blush with me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mask their brows, and hide their infamy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I alone alone must sit and pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O Night, thou furnace of foul-reeking smoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let not the jealous Day behold that face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immodesty lies martyr’d with disgrace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep still possession of thy gloomy place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the faults which in thy reign are made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Make me not object to the tell-tale Day!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The light will show, character’d in my brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The story of sweet chastity’s decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The impious breach of holy wedlock vow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, the illiterate, that know not how</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cipher what is writ in learned books,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fright her crying babe with Tarquin’s name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The orator, to deck his oratory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will couple my reproach to Tarquin’s shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will tie the hearers to attend each line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Let my good name, that senseless reputation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Collatine’s dear love be kept unspotted:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that be made a theme for disputation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The branches of another root are rotted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And undeserved reproach to him allotted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is as clear from this attaint of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I, ere this, was pure to Collatine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O unseen shame! invisible disgrace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O unfelt sore! crest-wounding, private scar!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reproach is stamp’d in Collatinus’ face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Tarquin’s eye may read the mot afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How he in peace is wounded, not in war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alas, how many bear such shameful blows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From me by strong assault it is bereft.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My honey lost, and I, a drone-like bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have no perfection of my summer left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But robb’d and ransack’d by injurious theft:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thy weak hive a wandering wasp hath crept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suck’d the honey which thy chaste bee kept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet am I guilty of thy honour’s wrack;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet for thy honour did I entertain him;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coming from thee, I could not put him back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it had been dishonour to disdain him:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, of weariness he did complain him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And talk’d of virtue: O unlook’d-for evil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When virtue is profaned in such a devil!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows’ nests?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or kings be breakers of their own behests?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But no perfection is so absolute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That some impurity doth not pollute.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The aged man that coffers-up his gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is plagued with cramps, and gouts, and painful fits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But like still-pining Tantalus he sits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And useless barns the harvest of his wits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having no other pleasure of his gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But torment that it cannot cure his pain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So then he hath it when he cannot use it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leaves it to be master’d by his young;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in their pride do presently abuse it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their father was too weak, and they too strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even in the moment that we call them ours.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What virtue breeds iniquity devours:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We have no good that we can say is ours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ill-annexed Opportunity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or kills his life or else his quality.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O Opportunity, thy guilt is great!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis thou that executest the traitor’s treason:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou set’st the wolf where he the lamb may get;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoever plots the sin, thou ’point’st the season;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis thou that spurn’st at right, at law, at reason;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou makest the vestal violate her oath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou blow’st the fire when temperance is thaw’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou smother’st honesty, thou murther’st troth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou foul abettor! thou notorious bawd!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy private feasting to a public fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy sugar’d tongue to bitter wormwood taste:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy violent vanities can never last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How comes it then, vile Opportunity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“When wilt thou be the humble suppliant’s friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bring him where his suit may be obtain’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chain’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give physic to the sick, ease to the pain’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they ne’er meet with Opportunity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The patient dies while the physician sleeps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Justice is feasting while the widow weeps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advice is sporting while infection breeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou grant’st no time for charitable deeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder’s rages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“When Truth and Virtue have to do with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They buy thy help; but Sin ne’er gives a fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gratis comes; and thou art well appaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well to hear as grant what he hath said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Collatine would else have come to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Tarquin did, but he was stay’d by thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Guilty thou art of murder and of theft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guilty of perjury and subornation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guilty of incest, that abomination;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An accessory by thine inclination</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all sins past, and all that are to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the creation to the general doom.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Mis-shapen Time, copesmate of ugly Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Base watch of woes, sin’s pack-horse, virtue’s snare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou nursest all and murtherest all that are:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, hear me then, injurious, shifting Time!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be guilty of my death, since of my crime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Why hath thy servant, Opportunity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betray’d the hours thou gavest me to repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cancell’d my fortunes, and enchained me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To endless date of never-ending woes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time’s office is to fine the hate of foes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To eat up errors by opinion bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Time’s glory is to calm contending kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To unmask falsehood, and bring truth to light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stamp the seal of time in aged things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wake the morn and sentinel the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wrong the wronger till he render right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smear with dust their glittering golden towers;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To fill with worm-holes stately monuments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feed oblivion with decay of things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To blot old books and alter their contents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pluck the quills from ancient ravens’ wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dry the old oak’s sap and cherish springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spoil antiquities of hammer’d steel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turn the giddy round of Fortune’s wheel;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To show the beldame daughters of her daughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make the child a man, the man a child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tame the unicorn and lion wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mock the subtle, in themselves beguiled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And waste huge stones with little water-drops.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Why work’st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless thou couldst return to make amends?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One poor retiring minute in an age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I could prevent this storm, and shun thy wrack!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou ceaseless lackey to eternity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devise extremes beyond extremity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make him curse this cursed crimeful night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the dire thought of his committed evil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let there bechance him pitiful mischances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make him moan; but pity not his moans:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stone him with harden’d hearts, harder than stones;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And let mild women to him lose their mildness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Let him have time to tear his curled hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him have time against himself to rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him have time of Time’s help to despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him have time to live a loathed slave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him have time a beggar’s orts to crave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And time to see one that by alms doth live</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Disdain to him disdained scraps to give.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Let him have time to see his friends his foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And merry fools to mock at him resort;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him have time to mark how slow time goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In time of sorrow, and how swift and short</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His time of folly and his time of sport;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever let his unrecalling crime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have time to wail th’abusing of his time.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teach me to curse him that thou taught’st this ill!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At his own shadow let the thief run mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself himself seek every hour to kill!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For who so base would such an office have</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As slanderous deathsman to so base a slave?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The baser is he, coming from a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shame his hope with deeds degenerate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mightier man, the mightier is the thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That makes him honour’d, or begets him hate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For greatest scandal waits on greatest state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moon being clouded presently is miss’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But little stars may hide them when they list.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unperceived fly with the filth away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if the like the snow-white swan desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stain upon his silver down will stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gnats are unnoted wheresoe’er they fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But eagles gazed upon with every eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To trembling clients be you mediators:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For me, I force not argument a straw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since that my case is past the help of law.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In vain I rail at Opportunity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful Night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain I cavil with mine infamy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain I spurn at my confirm’d despite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This helpless smoke of words doth me no right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The remedy indeed to do me good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is to let forth my foul-defiled blood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Poor hand, why quiver’st thou at this decree?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour thyself to rid me of this shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if I die, my honour lives in thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if I live, thou livest in my defame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wast afeard to scratch her wicked foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This said, from her be-tumbled couch she starteth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find some desperate instrument of death:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this no slaughterhouse no tool imparteth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make more vent for passage of her breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As smoke from Aetna, that in air consumes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that which from discharged cannon fumes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In vain,” quoth she, “I live, and seek in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some happy mean to end a hapless life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fear’d by Tarquin’s falchion to be slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I fear’d I was a loyal wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So am I now: O no, that cannot be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O, that is gone for which I sought to live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore now I need not fear to die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To clear this spot by death, at least I give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A badge of fame to slander’s livery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dying life to living infamy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor helpless help, the treasure stol’n away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To burn the guiltless casket where it lay!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stained taste of violated troth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not wrong thy true affection so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To flatter thee with an infringed oath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This bastard graff shall never come to growth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That thou art doting father of his fruit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor laugh with his companions at thy state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou shalt know thy interest was not bought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Basely with gold, but stol’n from forth thy gate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me, I am the mistress of my fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with my trespass never will dispense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till life to death acquit my forced offence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I will not poison thee with my attaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coin’d excuses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sable ground of sin I will not paint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hide the truth of this false night’s abuses:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this, lamenting Philomel had ended</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The well-tuned warble of her nightly sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And solemn night with slow sad gait descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ugly hell; when, lo, the blushing morrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore still in night would cloister’d be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Revealing day through every cranny spies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seems to point her out where she sits weeping;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom she sobbing speaks: “O eye of eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why pry’st thou through my window? leave thy peeping:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For day hath nought to do what’s done by night.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus cavils she with everything she sees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True grief is fond and testy as a child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Continuance tames the one; the other wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like an unpractised swimmer plunging still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With too much labour drowns for want of skill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holds disputation with each thing she views,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to herself all sorrow doth compare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No object but her passion’s strength renews;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as one shifts, another straight ensues:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometime ’tis mad, and too much talk affords.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The little birds that tune their morning’s joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make her moans mad with their sweet melody:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad souls are slain in merry company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grief best is pleased with grief’s society:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">True sorrow then is feelingly sufficed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When with like semblance it is sympathized.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis double death to drown in ken of shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ten times pines that pines beholding food;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see the salve doth make the wound ache more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great grief grieves most at that would do it good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, being stopp’d, the bounding banks o’erflows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“You mocking birds,” quoth she, “your tunes entomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within your hollow-swelling feather’d breasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my hearing be you mute and dumb:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My restless discord loves no stops nor rests;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Come, Philomel, that sing’st of ravishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make thy sad grove in my dishevell’d hair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I at each sad strain will strain a tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with deep groans the diapason bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For burden-wise I’ll hum on Tarquin still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While thou on Tereus descant’st better skill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And whiles against a thorn thou bear’st thy part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To imitate thee well, against my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, if it wink, shall thereon fall and die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These means, as frets upon an instrument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And for, poor bird, thou sing’st not in the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As shaming any eye should thee behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some dark deep desert, seated from the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will we find out; and there we will unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To creatures stern sad tunes, to change their kinds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As the poor frighted deer, that stands at gaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wildly determining which way to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or one encompass’d with a winding maze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cannot tread the way out readily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So with herself is she in mutiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To live or die which of the twain were better,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When life is shamed, and death reproach’s debtor.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To kill myself,” quoth she, “alack, what were it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with my body my poor soul’s pollution?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They that lose half with greater patience bear it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than they whose whole is swallow’d in confusion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mother tries a merciless conclusion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will slay the other and be nurse to none.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My body or my soul, which was the dearer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the one pure, the other made divine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose love of either to myself was nearer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When both were kept for heaven and Collatine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ay me! the bark peel’d from the lofty pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His leaves will wither and his sap decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So must my soul, her bark being peel’d away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Her house is sack’d, her quiet interrupted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her mansion batter’d by the enemy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sacred temple spotted, spoil’d, corrupted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grossly engirt with daring infamy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then let it not be call’d impiety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If in this blemish’d fort I make some hole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through which I may convey this troubled soul.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet die I will not till my Collatine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have heard the cause of my untimely death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revenge on him that made me stop my breath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My stained blood to Tarquin I’ll bequeath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which by him tainted shall for him be spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as his due writ in my testament.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My honour I’ll bequeath unto the knife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wounds my body so dishonoured.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis honour to deprive dishonour’d life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one will live, the other being dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So of shame’s ashes shall my fame be bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in my death I murder shameful scorn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My shame so dead, mine honour is new-born.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Dear lord of that dear jewel I have lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What legacy shall I bequeath to thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My resolution, love, shall be thy boast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By whose example thou reveng’d mayst be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Tarquin must be used, read it in me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, for my sake, serve thou false Tarquin so.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This brief abridgement of my will I make:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul and body to the skies and ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My resolution, husband, do thou take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine honour be the knife’s that makes my wound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My shame be his that did my fame confound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all my fame that lives disbursed be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To those that live, and think no shame of me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How was I overseen that thou shalt see it!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life’s foul deed, my life’s fair end shall free it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say ‘So be it:’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This plot of death when sadly she had laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wiped the brinish pearl from her bright eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With untuned tongue she hoarsely calls her maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fleet-wing’d duty with thought’s feathers flies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor Lucrece’ cheeks unto her maid seem so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With soft-slow tongue, true mark of modesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sorts a sad look to her lady’s sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For why her face wore sorrow’s livery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But durst not ask of her audaciously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor why her fair cheeks over-wash’d with woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each flower moisten’d like a melting eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so the maid with swelling drops gan wet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her circled eyne, enforced by sympathy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those fair suns, set in her mistress’ sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in a salt-waved ocean quench their light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A pretty while these pretty creatures stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One justly weeps; the other takes in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No cause, but company, of her drops spilling:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their gentle sex to weep are often willing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grieving themselves to guess at others’ smarts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For men have marble, women waxen, minds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore are they form’d as marble will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weak oppress’d, the impression of strange kinds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is form’d in them by force, by fraud, or skill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then call them not the authors of their ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more than wax shall be accounted evil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherein is stamp’d the semblance of a devil.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lays open all the little worms that creep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through crystal walls each little mote will peep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor women’s faces are their own faults’ books.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No man inveigh against the wither’d flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But chide rough winter that the flower hath kill’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that devour’d, but that which doth devour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor women’s faults, that they are so fulfill’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With men’s abuses: those proud lords, to blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make weak-made women tenants to their shame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The precedent whereof in Lucrece view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assail’d by night with circumstances strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of present death, and shame that might ensue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By that her death, to do her husband wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such danger to resistance did belong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dying fear through all her body spread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And who cannot abuse a body dead?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this, mild Patience bid fair Lucrece speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the poor counterfeit of her complaining:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My girl,” quoth she, “on what occasion break</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are raining?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If tears could help, mine own would do me good.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But tell me, girl, when went”⁠—and there she stay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till after a deep groan⁠—“Tarquin from, hence?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Madam, ere I was up,” replied the maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The more to blame my sluggard negligence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Myself was stirring ere the break of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, ere I rose, was Tarquin gone away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But, lady, if your maid may be so bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would request to know your heaviness.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O, peace!” quoth Lucrece: “if it should be told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The repetition cannot make it less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For more it is than I can well express:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that deep torture may be call’d a hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When more is felt than one hath power to tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Go, get me hither paper, ink, and pen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet save that labour, for I have them here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What should I say? One of my husband’s men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bid thou be ready, by and by, to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A letter to my lord, my love, my dear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bid him with speed prepare to carry it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First hovering o’er the paper with her quill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conceit and grief an eager combat fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wit sets down is blotted straight with will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much like a press of people at a door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throng her inventions, which shall go before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last she thus begins: “Thou worthy lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Health to thy person! next vouchsafe t’ afford⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some present speed to come and visit me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, I commend me from our house in grief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here folds she up the tenor of her woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this short schedule Collatine may know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her grief, but not her grief’s true quality:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She dares not thereof make discovery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere she with blood had stain’d her stain’d excuse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Besides, the life and feeling of her passion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that suspicion which the world my might bear her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With words, till action might become them better.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To see sad sights moves more than hear them told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For then the eye interprets to the ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heavy motion that it doth behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When every part a part of woe doth bear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her letter now is seal’d, and on it writ</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“At Ardea to my lord with more than haste.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The post attends, and she delivers it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charging the sour-faced groom to hie as fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As lagging fowls before the northern blast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Extremely still urgeth such extremes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The homely villain court’sies to her low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, blushing on her, with a steadfast eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receives the scroll without or yea or no,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth with bashful innocence doth hie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Imagine every eye beholds their blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Lucrece thought he blush’d to see her shame</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When, silly groom! God wot, it was defect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of spirit, life, and bold audacity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such harmless creatures have a true respect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To talk in deeds, while others saucily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Promise more speed, but do it leisurely:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even so this pattern of the worn-out age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pawn’d honest looks, but laid no words to gage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His kindled duty kindled her mistrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That two red fires in both their faces blazed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thought he blush’d, as knowing Tarquin’s lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, blushing with him, wistly on him gazed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her earnest eye did make him more amazed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more saw the blood his cheeks replenish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more she thought he spied in her some blemish.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But long she thinks till he return again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weary time she cannot entertain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For now ’tis stale to sigh, to weep, to groan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she her plaints a little while doth stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pausing for means to mourn some newer way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of skilful painting, made for Priam’s Troy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the which is drawn the power of Greece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Helen’s rape the city to destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Threatening cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the conceited painter drew so proud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As heaven, it seem’d, to kiss the turrets bow’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A thousand lamentable objects there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In scorn of nature, art gave lifeless life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a dry drop seem’d a weeping tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shed for the slaughter’d husband by the wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The red blood reek’d, to show the painter’s strife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dying eyes gleam’d forth their ashy lights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There might you see the labouring pioner</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begrim’d with sweat, and smeared all with dust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the towers of Troy there would appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very eyes of men through loopholes thrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such sweet observance in this work was had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one might see those far-off eyes look sad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In great commanders grace and majesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You might behold, triumphing in their faces;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In youth, quick bearing and dexterity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here and there the painter interlaces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale cowards, marching on with trembling paces;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which heartless peasants did so well resemble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In Ajax and Ulysses, O, what art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of physiognomy might one behold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The face of either ’cipher’d either’s heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their face their manners most expressly told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Ajax’ eyes blunt rage and rigour roll’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Show’d deep regard and smiling government.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ’twere encouraging the Greeks to fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making such sober action with his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it beguiled attention, charm’d the sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In speech, it seem’d, his beard, all silver white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wagg’d up and down, and from his lips did fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thin winding breath, which purl’d up to the sky.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>About him were a press of gaping faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which seem’d to swallow up his sound advice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All jointly listening, but with several graces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if some mermaid did their ears entice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some high, some low, the painter was so nice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The scalps of many, almost hid behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To jump up higher seem’d, to mock the mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here one man’s hand lean’d on another’s head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His nose being shadow’d by his neighbour’s ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here one being throng’d bears back, all boll’n and red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another smother’d seems to pelt and swear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in their rage such signs of rage they bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, but for loss of Nestor’s golden words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seem’d they would debate with angry swords.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For much imaginary work was there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for Achilles’ image stood his spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Griped in an armed hand; himself, behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stood for the whole to be imagined.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When their brave hope, bold Hector, march’d to field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to their hope they such odd action yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That through their light joy seemed to appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like bright things stain’d, a kind of heavy fear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And from the strond of Dardan, where they fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Simois’ reedy banks, the red blood ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose waves to imitate the battle sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With swelling ridges; and their ranks began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To break upon the galled shore, and than</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Retire again, till, meeting greater ranks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They join, and shoot their foam at Simois’ banks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find a face where all distress is stell’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many she sees where cares have carved some,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But none where all distress and dolour dwell’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she despairing Hecuba beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Staring on Priam’s wounds with her old eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which bleeding under Pyrrhus’ proud foot lies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In her the painter had anatomized</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time’s ruin, beauty’s wreck, and grim care’s reign:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her cheeks with chops and wrinkles were disguised;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what she was no semblance did remain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her blue blood, changed to black in every vein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Show’d life imprison’d in a body dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shapes her sorrow to the beldame’s woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who nothing wants to answer her but cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bitter words to ban her cruel foes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The painter was no god to lend her those;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To give her so much grief and not a tongue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Poor instrument,” quoth she, “without a sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drop sweet balm in Priam’s painted wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Show me the strumpet that began this stir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with my nails her beauty I may tear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Why should the private pleasure of someone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become the public plague of many moe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let sin, alone committed, light alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his head that hath transgressed so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For one’s offence why should so many fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To plague a private sin in general?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one man’s lust these many lives confounds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had doting Priam check’d his son’s desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here feelingly she weeps Troy’s painted woes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then little strength rings out the doleful knell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Lucrece set a-work, sad tales doth tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pencill’d pensiveness and colour’d sorrow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She throws her eyes about the painting round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whom she finds forlorn she doth lament.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last she sees a wretched image bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His face, though full of cares, yet show’d content;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So mild, that Patience seem’d to scorn his woes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In him the painter labour’d with his skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hide deceit, and give the harmless show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brow unbent, that seem’d to welcome woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That blushing red no guilty instance gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, like a constant and confirmed devil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He entertain’d a show so seeming just,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therein so ensconced his secret evil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That jealousy itself cold not mistrust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>False-creeping craft and perjury should thrust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into so bright a day such black-faced storms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The well-skill’d workman this mild image drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The credulous Old Priam after slew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose words, like wildfire, burnt the shining glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And little stars shot from their fixed places,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When their glass fell wherein they view’d their faces.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This picture she advisedly perused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chid the painter for his wondrous skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saying, some shape in Sinon’s was abused;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still on him she gazed; and gazing still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she concludes the picture was belied.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“It cannot be,” quoth she, “that so much guile”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would have said “can lurk in such a look;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Tarquin’s shape came in her mind the while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from her tongue “can lurk” from “cannot” took;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“It cannot be” she in that sense forsook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turn’d it thus, “It cannot be, I find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But such a face should bear a wicked mind:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For even as subtle Sinon here is painted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if with grief or travail he had fainted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me came Tarquin armed; so beguiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With outward honesty, but yet defiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Look, look, how listening Priam wets his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see those borrow’d tears that Sinon sheds!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those round clear pearls of his that move thy pity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Such devils steal effects from lightless hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These contraries such unity do hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to flatter fools, and make them bold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Priam’s trust false Sinon’s tears doth flatter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here, all enraged, such passion her assails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That patience is quite beaten from her breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comparing him to that unhappy guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose deed hath made herself herself detest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last she smilingly with this gives o’er;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fool, fool!” quoth she, “his wounds will not be sore.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And time doth weary time with her complaining.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both she thinks too long with her remaining:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Short time seems long in sorrow’s sharp sustaining:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they that watch see time how slow it creeps.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which all this time hath overslipp’d her thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she with painted images hath spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being from the feeling of her own grief brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By deep surmise of others’ detriment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Losing her woes in shows of discontent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It easeth some, though none it ever cured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To think their dolour others have endured.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now the mindful messenger, come back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brings home his lord and other company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round about her tear-distained eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue circles stream’d, like rainbows in the sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These water-galls in her dim element</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Foretell new storms to those already spent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which when her sad-beholding husband saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amazedly in her sad face he stares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes, though sod in tears, look’d red and raw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lively colour kill’d with deadly cares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath no power to ask her how she fares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both stood, like old acquaintance in a trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Met far from home, wondering each other’s chance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last he takes her by the bloodless hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus begins: “What uncouth ill event</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath thee befall’n, that thou dost trembling stand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why art thou thus attired in discontent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere once she can discharge one word of woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length address’d to answer his desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She modestly prepares to let them know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her honour is ta’en prisoner by the foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While Collatine and his consorted lords</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sad attention long to hear her words.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now this pale swan in her watery nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Few words,” quoth she, “shall fit the trespass best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where no excuse can give the fault amending:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In me more woes than words are now depending;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my laments would be drawn out too long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell them all with one poor tired tongue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then be this all the task it hath to say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stranger came, and on that pillow lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thou wast wont to rest thy weary head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what wrong else may be imagined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By foul enforcement might be done to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that, alas, thy Lucrece is not free.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shining falchion in my chamber came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A creeping creature, with a flaming light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And softly cried ‘Awake, thou Roman dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And entertain my love; else lasting shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On thee and thine this night I will inflict,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou my love’s desire do contradict.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘For some hard-favour’d groom of thine,’ quoth he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll murder straight, and then I’ll slaughter thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swear I found you where you did fulfil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lechers in their deed: this act will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My fame and thy perpetual infamy.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“With this, I did begin to start and cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then against my heart he sets his sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swearing, unless I took all patiently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should not live to speak another word;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So should my shame still rest upon record,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never be forgot in mighty Rome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Th’ adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far the weaker with so strong a fear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No rightful plea might plead for justice there:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His scarlet lust came evidence to swear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That my poor beauty had purloin’d his eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when the judge is robb’d the prisoner dies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O, teach me how to make mine own excuse!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or at the least this refuge let me find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though my gross blood be stain’d with this abuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immaculate and spotless is my mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was not forced; that never was inclined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To accessary yieldings, but still pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth in her poison’d closet yet endure.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, here, the hopeless merchant of this loss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With head declined, and voice damm’d up with woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sad set eyes, and wretched arms across,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From lips new-waxen pale begins to blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grief away that stops his answer so:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wretched as he is, he strives in vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What he breathes out his breath drinks up again.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As through an arch the violent roaring tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to the strait that forc’d him on so fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In rage sent out, recall’d in rage, being past:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even so his sighs, his sorrows make a saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To push grief on, and back the same grief draw.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dear Lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another power; no flood by raining slaketh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My woe too sensible thy passion maketh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More feeling-painful: let it then suffice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And for my sake, when I might charm thee so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be suddenly revenged on my foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine, mine, his own: suppose thou dost defend me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From what is past: the help that thou shalt lend me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sparing justice feeds iniquity.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But ere I name him, you fair lords,” quoth she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speaking to those that came with Collatine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Shall plight your honourable faiths to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ’tis a meritorious fair design</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To chase injustice with revengeful arms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies’ harms.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At this request, with noble disposition</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each present lord began to promise aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As bound in knighthood to her imposition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Longing to hear the hateful foe bewray’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she, that yet her sad task hath not said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The protestation stops. “O, speak,” quoth she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“How may this forced stain be wip’d from me?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What is the quality of mine offence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being constrain’d with dreadful circumstance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May my pure mind with the foul act dispense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My low-declined honour to advance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May any terms acquit me from this chance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The poison’d fountain clears itself again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And why not I from this compelled stain?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With this, they all at once began to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her body’s stain her mind untainted clears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While with a joyless smile she turns away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The face, that map which deep impression bears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hard misfortune, carved in it with tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“No, no,” quoth she, “no dame, hereafter living,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By my excuse shall claim excuse’s giving.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She throws forth Tarquin’s name: “He, he,” she says,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But more than “he” her poor tongue could not speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till after many accents and delays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untimely breathings, sick and short assays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She utters this: “He, he, fair lords, ’tis he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That guides this hand to give this wound to me.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheathed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That blow did bail it from the deep unrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that polluted prison where it breathed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeathed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life’s lasting date from cancell’d destiny.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Stone-still, astonish’d with this deadly deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Lucrece’ father that beholds her bleed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself on her self-slaughter’d body threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the purple fountain Brutus drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The murderous knife, and, as it left the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Circles her body in on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, like a late-sack’d island, vastly stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some of her blood still pure and red remain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some look’d black, and that false Tarquin stain’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>About the mourning and congealed face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that black blood a watery rigol goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which seems to weep upon the tainted place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever since, as pitying Lucrece’ woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corrupted blood some watery token shows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blood untainted still doth red abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blushing at that which is so putrified.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Daughter, dear daughter,” old Lucretius cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That life was mine which thou hast here deprived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in the child the father’s image lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where shall I live now Lucrece is unlived?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wast not to this end from me derived</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If children pre-decease progenitors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We are their offspring, and they none of ours.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Poor broken glass, I often did behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thy sweet semblance my old age new born;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now that fair fresh mirror, dim and old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shows me a bare-boned death by time outworn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shiver’d all the beauty of my glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I no more can see what once I was!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they surcease to be that should survive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leave the faltering feeble souls alive?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old bees die, the young possess their hive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again, and see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy father die, and not thy father thee!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this, starts Collatine as from a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then in key-cold Lucrece’ bleeding stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counterfeits to die with her a space;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till manly shame bids him possess his breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And live to be revenged on her death.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The deep vexation of his inward soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath served a dumb arrest upon his tongue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, mad that sorrow should his use control,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or keep him from heart-easing words so long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart’s aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no man could distinguish what he said.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet sometime “Tarquin” was pronounced plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But through his teeth, as if the name he tore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This windy tempest, till it blow up rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Held back his sorrow’s tide, to make it more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last it rains, and busy winds give o’er:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then son and father weep with equal strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The one doth call her his, the other his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet neither may possess the claim they lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The father says “She’s mine,” “O, mine she is,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replies her husband: “do not take away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sorrow’s interest; let no mourner say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He weeps for her, for she was only mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And only must be wail’d by Collatine.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O,” quoth Lucretius, “I did give that life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which she too early and too late hath spill’d.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Woe, woe,” quoth Collatine, “she was my wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I owed her, and ’tis mine that she hath kill’d.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My daughter” and “my wife” with clamours fill’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dispersed air, who, holding Lucrece’ life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Answer’d their cries, “my daughter” and “my wife.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Brutus, who pluck’d the knife from Lucrece’ side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing such emulation in their woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began to clothe his wit in state and pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burying in Lucrece’ wound his folly’s show.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with the Romans was esteemed so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As silly-jeering idiots are with kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sportive words and uttering foolish things:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now he throws that shallow habit by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein deep policy did him disguise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arm’d his long-hid wits advisedly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To check the tears in Collatinus’ eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou wronged lord of Rome,” quoth he, “arise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let my unsounded self, supposed a fool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now set thy long-experienced wit to school.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it revenge to give thyself a blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To slay herself, that should have slain her foe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such relenting dew of lamentations;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But kneel with me and help to bear thy part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rouse our Roman gods with invocations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they will suffer these abominations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgraced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now, by the Capitol that we adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by this chaste blood so unjustly stain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By heaven’s fair sun that breeds the fat earth’s store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all our country rights in Rome maintain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by chaste Lucrece’ soul that late complain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We will revenge the death of this true wife.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This said, he struck his hand upon his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kiss’d the fatal knife, to end his vow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his protestation urged the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, wondering at him, did his words allow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that deep vow, which Brutus made before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He doth again repeat, and that they swore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When they had sworn to this advised doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To show her bleeding body thorough Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so to publish Tarquin’s foul offence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which being done with speedy diligence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Romans plausibly did give consent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Tarquin’s everlasting banishment.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="the-passionate-pilgrim" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Passionate Pilgrim</h2>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When my love swears that she is made of truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do believe her, though I know she lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she might think me some untutor’d youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unskilful in the world’s false forgeries.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although I know my years be past the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I smiling credit her false-speaking tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outfacing faults in love with love’s ill rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wherefore says my love that she is young?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wherefore say not I that I am old?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, love’s best habit is a soothing tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And age, in love, loves not to have years told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore, I’ll lie with love, and love with me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since that our faults in love thus smother’d be.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Two loves I have, of comfort and despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like two spirits do suggest me still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My better angel is a man right fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My worser spirit a woman colour’d ill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To win me soon to hell, my female evil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tempteth my better angel from my side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wooing his purity with her fair pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whether that my angel be turn’d fiend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suspect I may, yet not directly tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For being both to me, both to each friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I guess one angel in another’s hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The truth I shall not know, but live in doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till my bad angel fire my good one out.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst whom the world could not hold argument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Persuade my heart to this false perjury?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woman I forswore; but I will prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy grace being gain’d cures all disgrace in me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My vow was breath, and breath a vapour is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, thou fair sun, that on this earth doth shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exhale this vapour vow; in thee it is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If broken, then it is no fault of mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If by me broke, what fool is not so wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To break an oath, to win a paradise?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Sweet Cytherea, sitting by a brook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With young Adonis, lovely, fresh, and green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did court the lad with many a lovely look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such looks as none could look but beauty’s queen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She told him stories to delight his ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She show’d him favours to allure his eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To win his heart, she touch’d him here and there⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touches so soft still conquer chastity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But whether unripe years did want conceit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or he refused to take her figur’d proffer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tender nibbler would not touch the bait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But smile and jest at every gentle offer:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then fell she on her back, fair queen, and toward:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rose and ran away; ah, fool too froward!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O never faith could hold, if not to beauty vow’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though to myself forsworn, to thee I’ll constant prove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those thoughts, to me like oaks, to thee like osiers bow’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Study his bias leaves, and makes his book thine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all those pleasures live that art can comprehend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is to me some praise, that I thy parts admire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy eye Jove’s lightning seems, thy voice his dreadful thunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Celestial as thou art, O do not love that wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To sing heaven’s praise with such an earthly tongue.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Scarce had the sun dried up the dewy morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarce the herd gone to the hedge for shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Cytherea, all in love forlorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A longing tarriance for Adonis made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under an osier growing by a brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brook where Adon used to cool his spleen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hot was the day; she hotter that did look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his approach, that often there had been.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon he comes, and throws his mantle by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stood stark naked on the brook’s green brim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun look’d on the world with glorious eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet not so wistly as this queen on him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He, spying her, bounced in, whereas he stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“O Jove,” quoth she, “why was not I a flood!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-7" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Fair is my love, but not so fair as fickle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mild as a dove, but neither true nor trusty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brighter than glass, and yet, as glass is, brittle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Softer than wax, and yet, as iron, rusty:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lily pale, with damask die to grace her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None fairer, nor none falser to deface her.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her lips to mine how often hath she joined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between each kiss her oaths of true love swearing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many tales to please me hath she coined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreading my love, the loss thereof still fearing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in the midst of all her pure protestings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her faith, her oaths, her tears, and all were jestings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She burn’d with love, as straw with fire flameth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She burn’d out love, as soon as straw outburneth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fram’d the love, and yet she foil’d the framing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bade love last, and yet she fell a turning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was this a lover, or a lecher whether?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bad in the best, though excellent in neither.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If music and sweet poetry agree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As they must needs, the sister and the brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then must the love be great ’twixt thee and me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because thou lovest the one, and I the other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dowland to thee is dear, whose heavenly touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the lute doth ravish human sense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spenser to me, whose deep conceit is such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, passing all conceit, needs no defence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou lovest to hear the sweet melodious sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Phoebus’ lute, the queen of music, makes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I in deep delight am chiefly drown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whenas himself to singing he betakes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One god is god of both, as poets feign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One knight loves both, and both in thee remain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Fair was the morn when the fair queen of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="elision">⋮</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paler for sorrow than her milk-white dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Adon’s sake, a youngster proud and wild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her stand she takes upon a steep-up hill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon Adonis comes with horn and hounds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, silly queen, with more than love’s good will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forbade the boy he should not pass those grounds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Once,” quoth she, “did I see a fair sweet youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here in these brakes deep-wounded with a boar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep in the thigh, a spectacle of ruth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See, in my thigh,” quoth she, “here was the sore.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She showed hers: he saw more wounds than one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blushing fled, and left her all alone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-10" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Sweet rose, fair flower, untimely pluck’d, soon vaded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pluck’d in the bud, and vaded in the spring!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright orient pearl, alack, too timely shaded!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair creature, kill’d too soon by death’s sharp sting!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a green plum that hangs upon a tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And falls, through wind, before the fall should be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I weep for thee, and yet no cause I have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For why? thou left’st me nothing in thy will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet thou left’st me more than I did crave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For why? I craved nothing of thee still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O yes, dear friend, I pardon crave of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy discontent thou didst bequeath to me.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Venus, with young Adonis sitting by her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under a myrtle shade, began to woo him:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She told the youngling how god Mars did try her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he fell to her, so fell she to him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Even thus,” quoth she, “the warlike god embraced me,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then she clipp’d Adonis in her arms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Even thus,” quoth she, “the warlike god unlaced me,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the boy should use like loving charms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Even thus,” quoth she, “he seized on my lips,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her lips on his did act the seizure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as she fetched breath, away he skips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would not take her meaning nor her pleasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, that I had my lady at this bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To kiss and clip me till I run away!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-12" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Crabbed age and youth cannot live together:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Youth is full of pleasance, age is full of care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Youth like summer morn, age like winter weather;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Youth like summer brave, age like winter bare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Youth is full of sport, age’s breath is short;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Youth is nimble, age is lame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Youth is hot and bold, age is weak and cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Youth is wild, and age is tame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Age, I do abhor thee; youth, I do adore thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, my love, my love is young!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Age, I do defy thee: O, sweet shepherd, hie thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For methinks thou stay’st too long.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-13" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Beauty is but a vain and doubtful good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shining gloss that vadeth suddenly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A flower that dies when first it “gins to bud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brittle glass that’s broken presently:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A doubtful good, a gloss, a glass, a flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lost, vaded, broken, dead within an hour.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as goods lost are seld or never found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As vaded gloss no rubbing will refresh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As flowers dead lie wither’d on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As broken glass no cement can redress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So beauty blemish’d once’s forever lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In spite of physic, painting, pain and cost.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-14" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Good night, good rest. Ah, neither be my share:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bade good night that kept my rest away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And daff’d me to a cabin hang’d with care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To descant on the doubts of my decay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Farewell,” quoth she, “and come again tomorrow:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fare well I could not, for I supp’d with sorrow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet at my parting sweetly did she smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In scorn or friendship, nill I construe whether:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T may be, she joy’d to jest at my exile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T may be, again to make me wander thither:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Wander,” a word for shadows like myself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As take the pain, but cannot pluck the pelf.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-15" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lord, how mine eyes throw gazes to the east!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart doth charge the watch; the morning rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth cite each moving sense from idle rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not daring trust the office of mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While Philomela sits and sings, I sit and mark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wish her lays were tuned like the lark;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For she doth welcome daylight with her ditty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drives away dark dismal-dreaming night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The night so pack’d, I post unto my pretty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heart hath his hope, and eyes their wished sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sorrow changed to solace, solace mix’d with sorrow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For why, she sigh’d and bade me come tomorrow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Were I with her, the night would post too soon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now are minutes added to the hours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To spite me now, each minute seems a moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet not for me, shine sun to succour flowers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pack night, peep day; good day, of night now borrow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Short, night, to-night, and length thyself to-morrow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-part-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnets to Sundry Notes of Music</h3>
				<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-16" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>It was a lording’s daughter, the fairest one of three,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That liked of her master as well as well might be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till looking on an Englishman, the fair’st that eye could see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Her fancy fell a-turning.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long was the combat doubtful that love with love did fight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To leave the master loveless, or kill the gallant knight:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To put in practice either, alas, it was a spite</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Unto the silly damsel!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But one must be refused; more mickle was the pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That nothing could be used to turn them both to gain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For of the two the trusty knight was wounded with disdain:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Alas, she could not help it!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus art with arms contending was victor of the day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which by a gift of learnlng did bear the maid away:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then, lullaby, the learned man hath got the lady gay;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For now my song is ended.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-17" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>On a day, alack the day!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love, whose month was ever May,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spied a blossom passing fair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Playing in the wanton air:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through the velvet leaves the wind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All unseen, ’gan passage find;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That the lover, sick to death,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wish’d himself the heaven’s breath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Air,” quoth he, “thy cheeks may blow;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Air, would I might triumph so!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, alas! my hand hath sworn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ne’er to pluck thee from thy thorn:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vow, alack! for youth unmeet:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Youth, so apt to pluck a sweet.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou for whom Jove would swear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Juno but an Ethiope were;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And deny himself for Jove,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Turning mortal for thy love.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-18" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>My flocks feed not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My ewes breed not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My rams speed not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">All is amiss:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love is dying,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Faith’s defying,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heart’s denying,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Causer of this.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All my merry jigs are quite forgot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All my lady’s love is lost, God wot:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where her faith was firmly fix’d in love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There a nay is plac’d without remove.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One silly cross</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wrought all my loss;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">O frowning Fortune, cursed, fickle dame!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For now I see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Inconstancy</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">More in women than in men remain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>In black mourn I,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All fears scorn I,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love bath forlorn me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Living in thrall:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Heart is bleeding,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All help needing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O cruel speeding,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fraughted with gall.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My shepherd’s pipe can sound no deal;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My wether’s bell rings doleful knell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My curtail dog, that wont to have play’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Plays not at all, but seems afraid;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With sighs so deep</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Procures to weep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In howling wise, to see my doleful plight.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How sighs resound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through heartless ground,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like a thousand vanquish’d men in bloody fight!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Clear wells spring not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sweet birds sing not,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Green plants bring not</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Forth they die;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Herds stand weeping,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Flocks all sleeping,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nymphs back peeping</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Fearfully:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All our pleasure known to us poor swains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All our merry meetings on the plains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All our evening sport from us is fled,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All our love is lost, for Love is dead.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Farewell, sweet lass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy like ne’er was</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For a sweet content, the cause of all my moan:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poor Corydon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must live alone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Other help for him I see that there is none.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-19" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h4>
					<p>
						<span>When as thine eye hath chose the dame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And stall’d the deer that thou shouldst strike,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let reason rule things worthy blame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As well as fancy partial might:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Take counsel of some wiser head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Neither too young, nor yet unwed.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And when thou comest thy tale to tell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Smooth not thy tongue with filed talk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lest she some subtle practice smell⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A cripple soon can find a halt;⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But plainly say thou lovest her well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And set thy person forth to sell.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>What though her frowning brows be bent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her cloudy looks will calm ere night:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then too late she will repent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thus dissembled her delight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And twice desire, ere it be day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That which with scorn she put away.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>What though she strive to try her strength,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ban and brawl, and say thee nay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her feeble force will yield at length,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When craft hath taught her thus to say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">“Had women been so strong as men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In faith, you had not had it then.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And to her will frame all thy ways;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Spare not to spend⁠—and chiefly there</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where thy desert may merit praise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By ringing in thy lady’s ear:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The strongest castle, tower, and town,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The golden bullet beats it down.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Serve always with assured trust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in thy suit be humble, true;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unless thy lady prove unjust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Press never thou to choose anew:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">When time shall serve, be thou not slack</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To proffer, though she put thee back.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The wiles and guiles that women work,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dissembled with an outward show,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The tricks and toys that in them lurk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The cock that treads them shall not know.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Have you not heard it said full oft,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A woman’s nay doth stand for nought?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Think women still to strive with men,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To sin and never for to saint:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is no heaven, by holy then,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When time with age doth them attaint.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Were kisses all the joys in bed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">One woman would another wed.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But, soft! enough, too much, I fear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lest that my mistress hear my song,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She’ll not stick to round me i’ the ear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To teach my tongue to be so long:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Yet will she blush, here be it said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">To hear her secrets so bewray’d.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-20" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Live with me, and be my love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we will all the pleasures prove</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That hills and valleys, dales and fields,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the craggy mountains yields.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There will we sit upon the rocks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And see the shepherds feed their flocks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By shallow rivers, by whose falls</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Melodious birds sing madrigals.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>There will I make thee a bed of roses,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With a thousand fragrant posies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A cap of flowers, and a kirtle</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Embroider’d all with leaves of myrtle.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>A belt of straw and ivy buds,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With coral clasps and amber studs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if these pleasures may thee move,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then live with me and be my love.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>
							<b>Love’s Answer.</b>
						</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>If that the world and love were young,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And truth in every shepherd’s tongue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These pretty pleasures might me move</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To live with thee and be thy love.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-passionate-pilgrim-poem-21" epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<h4 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>As it fell upon a day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the merry month of May,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sitting in a pleasant shade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which a grove of myrtles made,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beasts did leap, and birds did sing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Trees did grow, and plants did spring;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Everything did banish moan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save the nightingale alone:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She, poor bird, as all forlorn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lean’d her breast up-till a thorn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there sung the dolefull’st ditty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That to hear it was great pity:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Fie, fie, fie,” now would she cry;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Tereu, tereu!” by and by;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That to hear her so complain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scarce I could from tears refrain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For her griefs, so lively shown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made me think upon mine own.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ah, thought I, thou mourn’st in vain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None take pity on thy pain:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Senseless trees, they cannot hear thee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ruthless bears, they will not cheer thee.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>King Pandion, he is dead;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All thy friends are lapp’d in lead;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All thy fellow-birds do sing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Careless of thy sorrowing.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Even so, poor bird, like thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None alive will pity me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whilst as fickle fortune smil’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou and I were both beguil’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Everyone that flatters thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is no friend in misery.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Words are easy like the wind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Faithful friends are hard to find.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Every man will be thy friend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whilst thou hast wherewith to spend;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if store of crowns be scant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No man will supply thy want.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If that one be prodigal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bountiful they will him call:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with such-like flattering,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Pity but he were a king;”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If he be addict to vice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quickly him they will entice;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If to women he be bent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They have at commandement:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if fortune once do frown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then farewell his great renown:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They that fawn’d on him before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Use his company no more.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He that is thy frend indeed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He will help thee in thy need;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If thou sorrow, he will weep;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If thou wake, he cannot sleep:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus of every grief in heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He with thee doth bear a part.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These are certain signs to know</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Faithful friend from flattering foe.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</article>
		<article id="the-pheonix-and-the-turtle" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Phoenix and the Turtle</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Let the bird of loudest lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sole Arabian tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herald sad and trumpet be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whose sound chaste wings obey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But thou shrieking harbinger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foul precurrer of the fiend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Augur of the fever’s end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this troop come thou not near!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From this session interdict</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every fowl of tyrant wing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save the eagle, feather’d king:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep the obsequy so strict.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let the priest in surplice white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That defunctive music can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be the death-divining swan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest the requiem lack his right.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thou treble-dated crow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy sable gender makest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the breath thou givest and takest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Mongst our mourners shalt thou go.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Here the anthem doth commence:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love and constancy is dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phoenix and the turtle fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a mutual flame from hence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So they loved, as love in twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had the essence but in one;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two distincts, division none:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Number there in love was slain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hearts remote, yet not asunder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distance, and no space was seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt this turtle and his queen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in them it were a wonder.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So between them love did shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the turtle saw his right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flaming in the phoenix’ sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Either was the other’s mine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Property was thus appalled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the self was not the same;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Single nature’s double name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither two nor one was called.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Reason, in itself confounded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw division grow together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To themselves yet either neither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Simple were so well compounded,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That it cried, How true a twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemeth this concordant one!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love hath reason, reason none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If what parts can so remain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Whereupon it made this threne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the phoenix and the dove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Co-supremes and stars of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As chorus to their tragic scene.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<b>Threnos.</b>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beauty, truth, and rarity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grace in all simplicity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here enclos’d in cinders lie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Death is now the phoenix’ nest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the turtle’s loyal breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To eternity doth rest,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Leaving no posterity:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas not their infirmity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was married chastity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Truth may seem, but cannot be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty brag, but ’tis not she;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth and beauty buried be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To this urn let those repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That are either true or fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For these dead birds sigh a prayer.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
