<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Sonnets</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="sonnets" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Sonnets</h2>
				<p epub:type="dedication">To the only begetter of<br/>
				these ensuing sonnets<br/>
				<abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W. H.</abbr> all happiness<br/>
				and that eternity<br/>
				promised by<br/>
				our ever-living poet<br/>
				wisheth<br/>
				the well-wishing<br/>
				adventure in<br/>
				setting<br/>
				forth<br/>
				<abbr class="name">T. T.</abbr></p>
			</header>
			<article id="sonnet-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>
					<span>From fairest creatures we desire increase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thereby beauty’s rose might never die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as the riper should by time decease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tender heir might bear his memory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feed’st thy light’s flame with self-substantial fuel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making a famine where abundance lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou that art now the world’s fresh ornament</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only herald to the gaudy spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within thine own bud buriest thy content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, tender churl, mak’st waste in niggarding.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pity the world, or else this glutton be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To eat the world’s due, by the grave and thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dig deep trenches in thy beauty’s field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy youth’s proud livery so gazed on now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will be a tatter’d weed, of small worth held:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How much more praise deserved thy beauty’s use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou couldst answer “This fair child of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall sum my count and make my old excuse,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proving his beauty by succession thine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This were to be new made when thou art old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see thy blood warm when thou feel’st it cold.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-3">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Look in thy glass, and tell the face thou viewest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now is the time that face should form another;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For where is she so fair whose unear’d womb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or who is he so fond will be the tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his self-love to stop posterity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art thy mother’s glass, and she in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calls back the lovely April of her prime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou through windows of thine age shalt see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if thou live, remember’d not to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Die single, and thine image dies with thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-4">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon thyself thy beauty’s legacy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature’s bequest gives nothing but doth lend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And being frank she lends to those are free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bounteous largess given thee to give?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Profitless usurer, why dost thou use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For having traffic with thyself alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then how, when nature calls thee to be gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What acceptable audit canst thou leave?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy unused beauty must be tomb’d with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, used, lives th’ executor to be.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-5">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Those hours, that with gentle work did frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will play the tyrants to the very same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that unfair which fairly doth excel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For never-resting time leads summer on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hideous winter and confounds him there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sap check’d with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty o’ersnowed and bareness every where:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, were not summer’s distillation left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty’s effect with beauty were bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor it nor no remembrance what it was:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But flowers distill’d though they with winter meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-6">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Then let not winter’s ragged hand deface</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With beauty’s treasure, ere it be self-kill’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That use is not forbidden usury</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which happies those that pay the willing loan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That’s for thyself to breed another thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten times thyself were happier than thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ten of thine ten times refigured thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then what could death do, if thou shouldst depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving thee living in posterity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be not self-will’d, for thou art much too fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be death’s conquest and make worms thine heir.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-7">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! in the orient when the gracious light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lifts up his burning head, each under eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serving with looks his sacred majesty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And having climb’d the steep-up heavenly hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resembling strong youth in his middle age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attending on his golden pilgrimage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eyes, ’fore duteous, now converted are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his low tract and look another way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thou, thyself out-going in thy noon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlook’d on diest, unless thou get a son.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-8">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Music to hear, why hear’st thou music sadly?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why lovest thou that which thou receivest not gladly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else receivest with pleasure thine annoy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By unions married, do offend thine ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strikes each in each by mutual ordering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resembling sire and child and happy mother</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose speechless song, being many, seeming one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sings this to thee: “Thou single wilt prove none.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-9">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Is it for fear to wet a widow’s eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou consumest thyself in single life?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world will wail thee, like a makeless wife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world will be thy widow and still weep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou no form of thee hast left behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When every private widow well may keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By children’s eyes her husband’s shape in mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look, what an unthrift in the world doth spend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But beauty’s waste hath in the world an end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kept unused, the user so destroys it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No love toward others in that bosom sits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That on himself such murderous shame commits.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-10">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>
					<span>For shame! deny that thou bear’st love to any,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who for thyself art so unprovident.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grant if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that thou none lovest is most evident;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou art so possess’d with murderous hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ’gainst thyself thou stick’st not to conspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to repair should be thy chief desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, change thy thought, that I may change my mind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make thee another self, for love of me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That beauty still may live in thine or thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-11">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou growest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one of thine, from that which thou departest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestowest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herein lives wisdom, beauty and increase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without this, folly, age and cold decay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If all were minded so, the times should cease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threescore year would make the world away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let those whom Nature hath not made for store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harsh featureless and rude, barrenly perish:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look, whom she best endow’d she gave the more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-12">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When I do count the clock that tells the time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I behold the violet past prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sable curls all silver’d o’er with white;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When lofty trees I see barren of leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And summer’s green all girded up in sheaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then of thy beauty do I question make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou among the wastes of time must go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And die as fast as they see others grow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nothing ’gainst Time’s scythe can make defence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-13">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, that you were yourself! but, love, you are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No longer yours than you yourself here live:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against this coming end you should prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And your sweet semblance to some other give.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So should that beauty which you hold in lease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Find no determination; then you were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yourself again after yourself’s decease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which husbandry in honour might uphold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the stormy gusts of winter’s day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And barren rage of death’s eternal cold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, none but unthrifts! Dear my love, you know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You had a father: let your son say so.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-14">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet methinks I have astronomy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not to tell of good or evil luck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons’ quality;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or say with princes if it shall go well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By oft predict that I in heaven find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, constant stars, in them I read such art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As truth and beauty shall together thrive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else of thee this I prognosticate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy end is truth’s and beauty’s doom and date.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-15">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When I consider everything that grows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holds in perfection but a little moment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I perceive that men as plants increase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cheered and check’d even by the self-same sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wear their brave state out of memory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then the conceit of this inconstant stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To change your day of youth to sullied night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all in war with Time for love of you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he takes from you, I engraft you new.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-16">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But wherefore do not you a mightier way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fortify yourself in your decay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now stand you on the top of happy hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many maiden gardens yet unset</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much liker than your painted counterfeit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So should the lines of life that life repair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which this, Time’s pencil, or my pupil pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can make you live yourself in eyes of men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-17">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Who will believe my verse in time to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it were fill’d with your most high deserts?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though yet, heaven knows, it is but as a tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which hides your life and shows not half your parts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I could write the beauty of your eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in fresh numbers number all your graces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The age to come would say “this poet lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such heavenly touches ne’er touch’d earthly faces.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So should my papers yellow’d with their age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be scorn’d like old men of less truth than tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And your true rights be term’d a poet’s rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stretched metre of an antique song:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But were some child of yours alive that time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You should live twice; in it and in my rhyme.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-18">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art more lovely and more temperate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And summer’s lease hath all too short a date:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often is his gold complexion dimm’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every fair from fair sometime declines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By chance or nature’s changing course untrimm’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thy eternal summer shall not fade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shall Death brag thou wander’st in his shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in eternal lines to time thou growest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long lives this and this gives life to thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-19">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion’s paws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger’s jaws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burn the long-lived phoenix in her blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And do whate’er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the wide world and all her fading sweets;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, carve not with thy hours my love’s fair brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him in thy course untainted do allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For beauty’s pattern to succeeding men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, do thy worst, old Time: despite thy wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My love shall in my verse ever live young.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-20">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>A woman’s face with Nature’s own hand painted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woman’s gentle heart, but not acquainted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shifting change, as is false women’s fashion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man in hue all “hues” in his controlling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which steals men’s eyes and women’s souls amazeth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for a woman wert thou first created;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by addition me of thee defeated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since she prick’d thee out for women’s pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine be thy love and thy love’s use their treasure.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-21">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So is it not with me as with that Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stirr’d by a painted beauty to his verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who heaven itself for ornament doth use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every fair with his fair doth rehearse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making a couplement of proud compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sun and moon, with earth and sea’s rich gems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With April’s first-born flowers, and all things rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That heaven’s air in this huge rondure hems.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, let me, true in love, but truly write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then believe me, my love is as fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any mother’s child, though not so bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those gold candles fix’d in heaven’s air:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let them say more that like of hearsay well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will not praise that purpose not to sell.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-22">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My glass shall not persuade me I am old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long as youth and thou are of one date;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when in thee time’s furrows I behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then look I death my days should expiate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all that beauty that doth cover thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How can I then be elder than thou art?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, therefore, love, be of thyself so wary</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I not for myself, but for thee will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing thy heart which I will keep so chary</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou gavest me thine, not to give back again.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-23">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As an unperfect actor on the stage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who with his fear is put beside his part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose strength’s abundance weakens his own heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I, for fear of trust, forget to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perfect ceremony of love’s rite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in mine own love’s strength seem to decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’ercharged with burden of mine own love’s might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, let my looks be then the eloquence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who plead for love and look for recompense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than that tongue that more hath more express’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, learn to read what silent love hath writ:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hear with eyes belongs to love’s fine wit.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-24">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Mine eye hath play’d the painter and hath stell’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy beauty’s form in table of my heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My body is the frame wherein ’tis held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And perspective it is best painter’s art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For through the painter must you see his skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find where your true image pictured lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in my bosom’s shop is hanging still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They draw but what they see, know not the heart.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-25">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Let those who are in favour with their stars</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of public honour and proud titles boast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlook’d for joy in that I honour most.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great princes’ favourites their fair leaves spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as the marigold at the sun’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in themselves their pride lies buried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For at a frown they in their glory die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The painful warrior famoused for fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After a thousand victories once foil’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is from the book of honour razed quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the rest forgot for which he toil’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then happy I, that love and am beloved</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where I may not remove nor be removed.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-26">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee I send this written embassage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To witness duty, not to show my wit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that I hope some good conceit of thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thy soul’s thought, all naked, will bestow it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till whatsoever star that guides my moving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Points on me graciously with fair aspect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And puts apparel on my tatter’d loving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To show me worthy of thy sweet respect:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till then not show my head where thou mayst prove me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-27">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dear respose for limbs with travel tired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then begins a journey in my head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To work my mind, when body’s work’s expired:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For then my thoughts, from far where I abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looking on darkness which the blind do see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that my soul’s imaginary sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes black night beauteous and her old face new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thee and for myself no quiet find.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-28">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How can I then return in happy plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That am debarr’d the benefit of rest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When day’s oppression is not eased by night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But day by night, and night by day, oppress’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each, though enemies to either’s reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do in consent shake hands to torture me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one by toil, the other to complain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How far I toil, still farther off from thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I tell the day, to please him thou art bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So flatter I the swart-complexion’d night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When sparkling stars twire not thou gild’st the even.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And night doth nightly make grief’s length seem stronger.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-29">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When, in disgrace with Fortune and men’s eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I all alone beweep my outcast state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And look upon myself and curse my fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Featured like him, like him with friends possess’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desiring this man’s art and that man’s scope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what I most enjoy contented least;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haply I think on thee, and then my state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the lark at break of day arising</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven’s gate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thy sweet love remember’d such wealth brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That then I scorn to change my state with kings.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-30">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When to the sessions of sweet silent thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I summon up remembrance of things past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with old woes new wail my dear time’s waste:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For precious friends hid in death’s dateless night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weep afresh love’s long since cancell’d woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And moan the expense of many a vanish’d sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heavily from woe to woe tell o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I new pay as if not paid before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All losses are restored and sorrows end.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-31">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I by lacking have supposed dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there reigns love and all love’s loving parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all those friends which I thought buried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many a holy and obsequious tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath dear religious love stol’n from mine eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As interest of the dead, which now appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But things removed that hidden in thee lie!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who all their parts of me to thee did give;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That due of many now is thine alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their images I loved I view in thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou, all they, hast all the all of me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-32">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If thou survive my well-contented day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shalt by fortune once more re-survey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compare them with the bettering of the time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though they be outstripp’d by every pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exceeded by the height of happier men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Had my friend’s Muse grown with this growing age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dearer birth than this his love had brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To march in ranks of better equipage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since he died and poets better prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Theirs for their style I’ll read, his for his love.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-33">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Full many a glorious morning have I seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kissing with golden face the meadows green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon permit the basest clouds to ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ugly rack on his celestial face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the forlorn world his visage hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so my sun one early morn did shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all-triumphant splendour on my brow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But out, alack! he was but one hour mine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The region cloud hath mask’d him from me now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suns of the world may stain when heaven’s sun staineth.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-34">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make me travel forth without my cloak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To let base clouds o’ertake me in my way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For no man well of such a salve can speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The offender’s sorrow lends but weak relief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him that bears the strong offence’s cross.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-35">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>No more be grieved at that which thou hast done:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All men make faults, and even I in this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Authorizing thy trespass with compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy adverse party is thy advocate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’gainst myself a lawful plea commence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such civil war is in my love and hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I an accessary needs must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-36">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Let me confess that we two must be twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although our undivided loves are one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall those blots that do with me remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without thy help by me be borne alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In our two loves there is but one respect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though in our lives a separable spite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which though it alter not love’s sole effect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love’s delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not evermore acknowledge thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor thou with public kindness honour me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless thou take that honour from thy name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But do not so; I love thee in such sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-37">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As a decrepit father takes delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see his active child do deeds of youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So I, made lame by fortune’s dearest spite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or any of these all, or all, or more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I make my love engrafted to this store:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I in thy abundance am sufficed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by a part of all thy glory live.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Look, what is best, that best I wish in thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This wish I have; then ten times happy me!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-38">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How can my Muse want subject to invent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While thou dost breathe, that pour’st into my verse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine own sweet argument, too excellent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every vulgar paper to rehearse?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For who’s so dumb that cannot write to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou thyself dost give invention light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternal numbers to outlive long date.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If my slight Muse do please these curious days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-39">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, how thy worth with manners may I sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou art all the better part of me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what is’t but mine own when I praise thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even for this let us divided live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And our dear love lose name of single one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That by this separation I may give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That due to thee which thou deservest alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O absence, what a torment wouldst thou prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To entertain the time with thoughts of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that thou teachest how to make one twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By praising him here who doth hence remain!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-40">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then if for my love thou my love receivest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet be blamed, if thou thyself deceivest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although thou steal thee all my poverty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, love knows, it is a greater grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear greater wrong than hate’s known injury.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kill me with spites; yet we must not be foes.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-41">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I am sometime absent from thy heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy beauty and thy years full well befits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For still temptation follows where thou art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gentle thou art and therefore to be won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when a woman woos, what woman’s son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ay me! but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lead thee in their riot even there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hers, by thy beauty tempting her to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine, by thy beauty being false to me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-42">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>That thou hast her, it is not all my grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she hath thee, is of my wailing chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A loss in love that touches me more nearly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loving offenders, thus I will excuse ye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou dost love her, because thou know’st I love her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I lose thee, my loss is my love’s gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both find each other, and I lose both twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both for my sake lay on me this cross:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But here’s the joy; my friend and I are one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-43">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the day they view things unrespected;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And darkly bright are bright in dark directed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How would thy shadow’s form form happy show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the clear day with thy much clearer light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By looking on thee in the living day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All days are nights to see till I see thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-44">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Injurious distance should not stop my way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For then despite of space I would be brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No matter then although my foot did stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the farthest earth removed from thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nimble thought can jump both sea and land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as think the place where he would be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that so much of earth and water wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must attend time’s leisure with my moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Receiving nought by elements so slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But heavy tears, badges of either’s woe.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-45">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The other two, slight air and purging fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are both with thee, wherever I abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first my thought, the other my desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These present-absent with swift motion slide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when these quicker elements are gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tender embassy of love to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life, being made of four, with two alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sinks down to death, oppress’d with melancholy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until life’s composition be recured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By those swift messengers returned from thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who even but now come back again assured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I send them back again and straight grow sad.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-46">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How to divide the conquest of thy sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eye my heart thy picture’s sight would bar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A closet never pierced with crystal eyes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the defendant doth that plea deny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And says in him thy fair appearance lies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ’cide this title is impanneled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by their verdict is determined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clear eye’s moiety and the dear heart’s part:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thus; mine eye’s due is thy outward part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my heart’s right thy inward love of heart.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-47">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each doth good turns now unto the other:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that mine eye is famish’d for a look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With my love’s picture then my eye doth feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the painted banquet bids my heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another time mine eye is my heart’s guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, either by thy picture or my love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself away art present still with me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I am still with them and they with thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awakes my heart to heart’s and eye’s delight.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-48">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How careful was I, when I took my way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to my use it might unused stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, best of dearest, and mine only care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee have I not lock’d up in any chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the gentle closure of my breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And even thence thou wilt be stol’n I fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-49">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XLIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Against that time, if ever that time come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I shall see thee frown on my defects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call’d to that audit by advised respects;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When love, converted from the thing it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall reasons find of settled gravity⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against that time do I ensconce me here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the knowledge of mine own desert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this my hand against myself uprear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To guard the lawful reasons on thy part:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since why to love I can allege no cause.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-50">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">L</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How heavy do I journey on the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When what I seek, my weary travel’s end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth teach that case and that repose to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if by some instinct the wretch did know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rider loved not speed, being made from thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bloody spur cannot provoke him on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which heavily he answers with a groan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More sharp to me than spurring to his side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that same groan doth put this in my mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My grief lies onward and my joy behind.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-51">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thus can my love excuse the slow offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From where thou art, why should I haste me thence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I return, of posting is no need.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, what excuse will my poor beast then find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When swift extremity can seem but slow?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In winged speed no motion shall I know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore desire, of perfect’st love being made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall neigh⁠—no dull flesh⁠—in his fiery race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since from thee going he went wilful-slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Towards thee I’ll run, and give him leave to go.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-52">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So am I as the rich, whose blessed key</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which he will not every hour survey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since, seldom coming, in that long year set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or captain jewels in the carcanet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So is the time that keeps you as my chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make some special instant special blest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By new unfolding his imprison’d pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blessed are you, whose worthiness gives scope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being had, to triumph, being lack’d to hope.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-53">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>What is your substance, whereof are you made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That millions of strange shadows on you tend?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since everyone hath, everyone, one shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you, but one, can every shadow lend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is poorly imitated after you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Helen’s cheek all art of beauty set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you in Grecian tires are painted new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak of the spring and foison of the year;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one doth shadow of your beauty show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other as your bounty doth appear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you in every blessed shape we know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all external grace you have some part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But you like none, none you, for constant heart.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-54">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that sweet odour which doth in it live.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The canker-blooms have full as deep a dye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the perfumed tincture of the roses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hang on such thorns and play as wantonly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When summer’s breath their masked buds discloses:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, for their virtue only is their show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They live unwoo’d and unrespected fade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-55">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Not marble, nor the gilded monuments</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you shall shine more bright in these contents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than unswept stone besmear’d with sluttish time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When wasteful war shall statues overturn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And broils root out the work of masonry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Mars his sword nor war’s quick fire shall burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The living record of your memory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even in the eyes of all posterity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wear this world out to the ending doom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So, till the judgment that yourself arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-56">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Sweet love renew thy force; be it not said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which but to-day by feeding is allay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow sharpen’d in his former might:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So love be thou; although to-day thou fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fulness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow see again, and do not kill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spirit of love with a perpetual dulness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let this sad interim like the ocean be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which parts the shore, where two contracted new</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come daily to the banks, that, when they see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return of love, more blest may be the view;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Else call it winter, which being full of care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes summer’s welcome thrice more wish’d, more rare.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-57">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Being your slave, what should I do but tend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the hours and times of your desire?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have no precious time at all to spend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor services to do, till you require.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When you have bid your servant once adieu;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor dare I question with my jealous thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save, where you are, how happy you make those.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So true a fool is love, that in your will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-58">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>That god forbid that made me first your slave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should in thought control your times of pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, let me suffer, being at your beck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The imprison’d absence of your liberty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without accusing you of injury.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be where you list, your charter is so strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you yourself may privilage your time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what you will; to you it doth belong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am to wait, though waiting so be hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-59">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If there be nothing new, but that which is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, labouring for invention, bear amiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The second burthen of a former child!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, that record could with a backward look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even of five hundred courses of the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show me your image in some antique book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since mind at first in character was done!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I might see what the old world could say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this composed wonder of your frame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether we are mended, or whether better they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or whether revolution be the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, sure I am, the wits of former days</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To subjects worse have given admiring praise.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-60">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So do our minutes hasten to their end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each changing place with that which goes before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sequent toil all forwards do contend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nativity, once in the main of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crooked eclipses ’gainst his glory fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Time that gave, doth now his gift confound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And delves the parallels in beauty’s brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeds on the rarities of nature’s truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-61">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Is it thy will thy image should keep open</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heavy eyelids to the weary night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it thy spirit that thou send’st from thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So far from home into my deeds to pry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find out shames and idle hours in me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is my love that keeps mine eye awake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To play the watchman ever for thy sake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From me far off, with others all too near.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-62">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all my soul and all my every part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for this sin there is no remedy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is so grounded inward in my heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No shape so true, no truth of such account;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for myself mine own worth do define,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I all other in all worths surmount.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when my glass shows me myself indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beated and chopp’d with tann’d antiquity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine own self-love quite contrary I read:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Self so self-loving were iniquity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis thee, myself, that for myself I praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Painting my age with beauty of thy days.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-63">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Against my love shall be, as I am now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Time’s injurious hand crush’d and o’erworn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When hours have drain’d his blood and filled his brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath travell’d on to age’s steepy night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all those beauties whereof now he’s king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are vanishing or vanish’d out of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stealing away the treasure of his spring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such a time do I now fortify</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against confounding age’s cruel knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he shall never cut from memory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sweet love’s beauty, though my lover’s life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they shall live, and he in them still green.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-64">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When I have seen by Time’s fell hand defaced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rich proud cost of outworn buried age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When sometime lofty towers I see downrazed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I have seen the hungry ocean gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the firm soil win of the watery main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Increasing store with loss and loss with store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I have seen such interchange of state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or state itself confounded to decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Time will come and take my love away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This thought is as a death, which cannot choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But weep to have that which it fears to lose.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-65">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sad mortality o’er-sways their power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose action is no stronger than a flower?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, how shall summer’s honey breath hold out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the wrackful siege of battering days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When rocks impregnable are not so stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor gates of steel so strong, but Time decays?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O fearful meditation! where, alack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall Time’s best jewel from Time’s chest lie hid?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, none, unless this miracle have might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in black ink my love may still shine bright.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-66">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, to behold desert a beggar born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And needy nothing trimm’d in jollity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And purest faith unhappily forsworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gilded honour shamefully misplaced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strength by limping sway disabled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And art made tongue-tied by authority,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And folly doctor-like controlling skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And simple truth miscall’d simplicity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And captive good attending captain ill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-67">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his presence grace impiety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sin by him advantage should achieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lace itself with his society?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should false painting imitate his cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And steal dead seeming of his living hue?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should poor beauty indirectly seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beggar’d of blood to blush through lively veins?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she hath no exchequer now but his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And proud of many, lives upon his gains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O, him she stores, to show what wealth she had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In days long since, before these last so bad.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-68">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before these bastard signs of fair were born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or durst inhabit on a living brow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the golden tresses of the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To live a second life on second head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere beauty’s dead fleece made another gay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In him those holy antique hours are seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without all ornament, itself and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making no summer of another’s green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And him as for a map doth Nature store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To show false Art what beauty was of yore.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-69">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Those parts of thee that the world’s eye doth view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But those same tongues that give thee so thine own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In other accents do this praise confound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They look into the beauty of thy mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, churls, their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The solve is this, that thou dost common grow.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-70">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For slander’s mark was ever yet the fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ornament of beauty is suspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crow that flies in heaven’s sweetest air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou be good, slander doth but approve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy worth the greater, being woo’d of time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou present’st a pure unstained prime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast pass’d by the ambush of young days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either not assail’d or victor being charged;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tie up envy evermore enlarged:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If some suspect of ill mask’d not thy show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-71">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>No longer mourn for me when I am dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give warning to the world that I am fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, if you read this line, remember not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hand that writ it; for I love you so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thinking on me then should make you woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, if, I say, you look upon this verse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I perhaps compounded am with clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do not so much as my poor name rehearse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let your love even with my life decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest the wise world should look into your moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mock you with me after I am gone.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-72">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, lest the world should task you to recite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What merit lived in me, that you should love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After my death, dear love, forget me quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For you in me can nothing worthy prove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do more for me than mine own desert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hang more praise upon deceased I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than niggard truth would willingly impart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, lest your true love may seem false in this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you for love speak well of me untrue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My name be buried where my body is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And live no more to shame nor me nor you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so should you, to love things nothing worth.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-73">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>That time of year thou mayst in me behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bare ruin’d choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In me thou see’st the twilight of such day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As after sunset fadeth in the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which by and by black night doth take away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death’s second self, that seals up all in rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In me thou see’st the glowing of such fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the death-bed whereon it must expire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consumed with that which it was nourish’d by.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This thou perceivest, which makes thy love more strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To love that well which thou must leave ere long.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-74">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But be contented: when that fell arrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without all bail shall carry me away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life hath in this line some interest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou reviewest this, thou dost review</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very part was consecrate to thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth can have but earth, which is his due;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spirit is thine, the better part of me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prey of worms, my body being dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coward conquest of a wretch’s knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too base of thee to be remembered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worth of that is that which it contains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that is this, and this with thee remains.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-75">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So are you to my thoughts as food to life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as sweet-season’d showers are to the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the peace of you I hold such strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ’twixt a miser and his wealth is found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now proud as an enjoyer and anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now counting best to be with you alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then better’d that the world may see my pleasure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometime all full with feasting on your sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by and by clean starved for a look;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possessing or pursuing no delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save what is had or must from you be took.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or gluttoning on all, or all away.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-76">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Why is my verse so barren of new pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So far from variation or quick change?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why with the time do I not glance aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To new-found methods and to compounds strange?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why write I still all one, ever the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keep invention in a noted weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That every word doth almost tell my name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showing their birth and where they did proceed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>,O know, sweet love, I always write of you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you and love are still my argument;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So all my best is dressing old words new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spending again what is already spent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For as the sun is daily new and old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So is my love still telling what is told.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-77">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These vacant leaves thy mind’s imprint will bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of this book this learning mayst thou taste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou by thy dial’s shady stealth mayst know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Time’s thievish progress to eternity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look, what thy memory cannot contain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those children nursed, deliver’d from thy brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-78">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found such fair assistance in my verse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As every alien pen hath got my use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And under thee their poesy disperse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine eyes that taught the dumb on high to sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heavy ignorance aloft to fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have added feathers to the learned’s wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And given grace a double majesty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet be most proud of that which I compile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose influence is thine and born of thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In others’ works thou dost but mend the style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thou art all my art and dost advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As high as learning my rude ignorance.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-79">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now my gracious numbers are decay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my sick Muse doth give an other place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He robs thee of and pays it thee again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lends thee virtue and he stole that word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thy behaviour; beauty doth he give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found it in thy cheek; he can afford</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then thank him not for that which he doth say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-80">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, how I faint when I of you do write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the praise thereof spends all his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make me tongue-tied, speaking of your fame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since your worth, wide as the ocean is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My saucy bark inferior far to his</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On your broad main doth wilfully appear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, being wreck’d, I am a worthless boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He of tall building and of goodly pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then if he thrive and I be cast away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worst was this; my love was my decay.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-81">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Or I shall live your epitaph to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From hence your memory death cannot take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although in me each part will be forgotten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your name from hence immortal life shall have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earth can yield me but a common grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When you entombed in men’s eyes shall lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your monument shall be my gentle verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which eyes not yet created shall o’er-read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tongues to be your being shall rehearse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all the breathers of this world are dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You still shall live⁠—such virtue hath my pen⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-82">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I grant thou wert not married to my Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore mayst without attaint o’erlook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dedicated words which writers use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their fair subject, blessing every book.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore art enforced to seek anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And do so, love; yet when they have devised</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What strained touches rhetoric can lend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In true plain words by thy true-telling friend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their gross painting might be better used</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abused.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-83">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I never saw that you did painting need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore to your fair no painting set;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found, or thought I found, you did exceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That barren tender of a poet’s debt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore have I slept in your report,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you yourself being extant well might show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How far a modern quill doth come too short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This silence for my sin you did impute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which shall be most my glory, being dumb;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I impair not beauty being mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When others would give life and bring a tomb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There lives more life in one of your fair eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than both your poets can in praise devise.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-84">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Who is it that says most? which can say more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than this rich praise, that you alone are you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whose confine immured is the store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which should example where your equal grew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lean penury within that pen doth dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to his subject lends not some small glory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he that writes of you, if he can tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you are you, so dignifies his story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him but copy what in you is writ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not making worse what nature made so clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making his style admired every where.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-85">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While comments of your praise, richly compiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reserve their character with golden quill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think good thoughts whilst other write good words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like unletter’d clerk still cry “Amen”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every hymn that able spirit affords</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In polish’d form of well-refined pen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearing you praised, I say “ ’Tis so, ’tis true,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the most of praise add something more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that is in my thought, whose love to you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then others for the breath of words respect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-86">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bound for the prize of all too precious you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, neither he, nor his compeers by night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giving him aid, my verse astonished.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He, nor that affable familiar ghost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As victors of my silence cannot boast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was not sick of any fear from thence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when your countenance fill’d up his line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then lack’d I matter; that enfeebled mine.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-87">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like enough thou know’st thy estimate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My bonds in thee are all determinate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for that riches where is my deserving?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so my patent back again is swerving.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself thou gavest, thy own worth then not knowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes home again, on better judgement making.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-88">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When thou shalt be disposed to set me light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And place my merit in the eye of scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon thy side against myself I’ll fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mine own weakness being best acquainted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon thy part I can set down a story</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of faults conceal’d, wherein I am attainted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I by this will be a gainer too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The injuries that to myself I do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such is my love, to thee I so belong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That for thy right myself will bear all wrong.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-89">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LXXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will comment upon that offence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against thy reasons making no defence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To set a form upon desired change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I’ll myself disgrace: knowing thy will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will acquaintance strangle and look strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And haply of our old acquaintance tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thee against myself I’ll vow debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I must ne’er love him whom thou dost hate.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-90">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XC</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And do not drop in for an after-loss:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, do not, when my heart hath ’scaped this sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come in the rearward of a conquer’d woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To linger out a purposed overthrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When other petty griefs have done their spite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the onset come; so shall I taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first the very worst of fortune’s might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-91">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XCI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some in their wealth, some in their body’s force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some in their garments, though new-fangled ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But these particulars are not my measure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these I better in one general best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy love is better than high birth to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Richer than wealth, prouder than garments’ cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of more delight than hawks and horses be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And having thee, of all men’s pride I boast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All this away and me most wretchcd make.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-92">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XCII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>But do thy worst to steal thyself away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For term of life thou art assured mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And life no longer than thy love will stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it depends upon that love of thine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in the least of them my life hath end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see a better state to me belongs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than that which on thy humour doth depend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, what a happy title do I find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Happy to have thy love, happy to die!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what’s so blessed-fair that fears no blot?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-93">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XCIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So shall I live, supposing thou art true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a deceived husband; so love’s face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May still seem love to me, though alter’d new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there can live no hatred in thine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In many’s looks the false heart’s history</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But heaven in thy creation did decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er thy thoughts or thy heart’s workings be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How like Eve’s apple doth thy beauty grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-94">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XCIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>They that have power to hurt, and will do none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That do not do the thing they most do show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rightly do inherit heaven’s graces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And husband nature’s riches from expense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are the lords and owners of their faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others but stewards of their excellence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The summer’s flower is to the summer sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though to itself it only live and die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if that flower with base infection meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The basest weed outbraves his dignity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-95">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XCV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which like a canker in the fragrant rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tongue that tells the story of thy days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making lascivious comments on thy sport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naming thy name blesses an ill report.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, what a mansion have those vices got</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which for their habitation chose out thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where beauty’s veil doth cover every blot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-96">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XCVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both grace and faults are loved of more and less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou makest faults graces that to thee resort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As on the finger of a throned queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The basest jewel will be well esteem’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So are those errors that in thee are seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To truths translated and for true things deem’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If like a lamb he could his looks translate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many gazers mightst thou lead away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But do not so; I love thee in such sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-97">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XCVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How like a winter hath my absence been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What old December’s bareness everywhere!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet this time removed was summer’s time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like widow’d wombs after their lords’ decease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet this abundant issue seem’d to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hope of orphans and unfather’d fruit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, thou away, the very birds are mute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if they sing, ’tis with so dull a cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That leaves look pale, dreading the winter’s near.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-98">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XCVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>From you have I been absent in the spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When proud-pied April dress’d in all his trim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath put a spirit of youth in everything,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That heavy Saturn laugh’d and leap’d with him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet nor the lays of birds nor the sweet smell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of different flowers in odour and in hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could make me any summer’s story tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did I wonder at the lily’s white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were but sweet, but figures of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet seem’d it winter still, and, you away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As with your shadow I with these did play:</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-99">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XCIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The forward violet thus did I chide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not from my love’s breath? The purple pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In my love’s veins thou hast too grossly dyed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lily I condemned for thy hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And buds of marjoram had stol’n thy hair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One blushing shame, another white despair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A third nor red nor white, had stol’n of both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his robbery had annex’d thy breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vengeful canker eat him up to death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More flowers I noted, yet I none could see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sweet or colour it had stol’n from thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-100">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">C</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget’st so long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spend’st thou thy fury on some worthless song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In gentle numbers time so idly spent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gives thy pen both skill and argument.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rise, resty Muse, my love’s sweet face survey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Time have any wrinkle graven there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any, be a satire to decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make Time’s spoils despised everywhere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So thou prevent’st his scythe and crooked knife.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-101">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both truth and beauty on my love depends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So dost thou too, and therein dignified.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make answer, Muse: wilt thou not haply say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty no pencil, beauty’s truth to lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But best is best, if never intermix’d?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excuse not silence so; for’t lies in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make him much outlive a gilded tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to be praised of ages yet to be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make him seem long hence as he shows now.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-102">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My love is strengthen’d, though more weak in seeming;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love not less, though less the show appear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That love is merchandized whose rich esteeming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The owner’s tongue doth publish every where.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our love was new and then but in the spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I was wont to greet it with my lays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Philomel in summer’s front doth sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that the summer is less pleasant now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that wild music burthens every bough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore like her I sometime hold my tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because I would not dull you with my song.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-103">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Alack, what poverty my Muse brings forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That having such a scope to show her pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The argument all bare is of more worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than when it hath my added praise beside!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, blame me not, if I no more can write!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look in your glass, and there appears a face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That over-goes my blunt invention quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mar the subject that before was well?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to no other pass my verses tend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more, much more, than in my verse can sit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your own glass shows you when you look in it.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-104">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>To me, fair friend, you never can be old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as you were when first your eye I eyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have from the forests shook three summers’ pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In process of the seasons have I seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steal from his figure and no pace perceived;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath motion and mine eye may be deceived:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere you were born was beauty’s summer dead.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-105">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Let not my love be call’d idolatry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor my beloved as an idol show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since all alike my songs and praises be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To one, of one, still such, and ever so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still constant in a wondrous excellence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore my verse to constancy confined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One thing expressing, leaves out difference.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Fair, kind, and true” is all my argument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Fair, kind, and true” varying to other words;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this change is my invention spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fair, kind, and true,” have often lived alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which three till now never kept seat in one.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-106">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When in the chronicle of wasted time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see descriptions of the fairest wights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beauty making beautiful old rhyme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty’s best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see their antique pen would have express’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even such a beauty as you master now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So all their praises are but prophecies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this our time, all you prefiguring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for they look’d but with divining eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They had not skill enough your worth to sing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For we, which now behold these present days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-107">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can yet the lease of my true love control,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sad augurs mock their own presage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Incertainties now crown themselves assured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And peace proclaims olives of endless age.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now with the drops of this most balmy time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since, spite of him, I’ll live in this poor rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While he insults o’er dull and speechless tribes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou in this shalt find thy monument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When tyrants’ crests and tombs of brass are spent.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-108">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>What’s in the brain that ink may character</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What’s new to speak, what now to register,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That may express my love or thy dear merit?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must each day say o’er the very same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as when first I hallow’d thy fair name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that eternal love in love’s fresh case</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weighs not the dust and injury of age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But makes antiquity for aye his page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Finding the first conceit of love there bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where time and outward form would show it dead.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-109">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, never say that I was false of heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though absence seem’d my flame to qualify.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As easy might I from myself depart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is my home of love: if I have ranged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like him that travels I return again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that myself bring water for my stain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never believe, though in my nature reign’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it could so preposterously be stain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For nothing this wide universe I call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save thou my rose; in it thou art my all.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-110">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Alas, ’tis true I have gone here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made myself a motley to the view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made old offences of affections new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most true it is that I have look’d on truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Askance and strangely: but by all above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These blenches gave my heart another youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And worse essays proved thee my best of love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now all is done, have what shall have no end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine appetite I never more will grind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On newer proof, to try an older friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A god in love, to whom I am confined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-111">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, for my sake do you with Fortune chide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That did not better for my life provide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than public means which public manners breeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And almost thence my nature is subdued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what it works in, like the dyer’s hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pity me then, and wish I were renew’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Potions of eisel ’gainst my strong infection;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No bitterness that I will bitter think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor double penance to correct correction.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even that your pity is enough to cure me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-112">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Your love and pity doth the impression fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which vulgar scandal stamp’d upon my brow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what care I who calls me well or ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So you o’er-green my bad, my good allow?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You are my all the world, and I must strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To know my shames and praises from your tongue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None else to me, nor I to none alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That my steel’d sense or changes right or wrong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In so profound abysm I throw all care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of others’ voices, that my adder’s sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To critic and to flatterer stopped are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You are so strongly in my purpose bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the world besides methinks are dead.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-113">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that which governs me to go about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth part his function and is partly blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems seeing, but effectually is out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it no form delivers to the heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bird, of flower, or shape, which it doth latch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if it see the rud’st or gentlest sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The most sweet favour or deformed’st creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mountain or the sea, the day or night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Incapable of more, replete with you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My most true mind thus makes mine untrue.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-114">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Or whether doth my mind, being crown’d with you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drink up the monarch’s plague, this flattery?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that your love taught it this alchemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make of monsters and things indigest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creating every bad a perfect best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fast as objects to his beams assemble?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, ’tis the first; ’tis flattery in my seeing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eye well knows what with his gust is ’greeing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his palate doth prepare the cup:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If it be poison’d, ’tis the lesser sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-115">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Those lines that I before have writ do lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even those that said I could not love you dearer:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet then my judgment knew no reason why</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But reckoning time, whose million’d accidents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creep in ’twixt vows and change decrees of kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp’st intents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, why, fearing of time’s tyranny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might I not then say “Now I love you best,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I was certain o’er incertainty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love is a babe; then might I not say so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To give full growth to that which still doth grow?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-116">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Let me not to the marriage of true minds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admit impediments. Love is not love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which alters when it alteration finds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or bends with the remover to remove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That looks on tempests and is never shaken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is the star to every wandering bark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose worth’s unknown, although his height be taken.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s not Time’s fool, though rosy lips and cheeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his bending sickle’s compass come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bears it out even to the edge of doom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If this be error and upon me proved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I never writ, nor no man ever loved.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-117">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein I should your great deserts repay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgot upon your dearest love to call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I have frequent been with unknown minds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And given to time your own dear-purchased right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I have hoisted sail to all the winds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which should transport me farthest from your sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Book both my wilfulness and errors down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on just proof surmise accumulate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring me within the level of your frown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shoot not at me in your waken’d hate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since my appeal says I did strive to prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The constancy and virtue of your love.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-118">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Like as, to make our appetite more keen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eager compounds we our palate urge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, to prevent our maladies unseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We sicken to shun sickness when we purge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so, being full of your ne’er-cloying sweetness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be diseased ere that there was true needing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus policy in love, to anticipate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ills that were not, grew to faults assured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought to medicine a healthful state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thence I learn, and find the lesson true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drugs poison him that so feil sick of you.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-119">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distill’d from limbecks foul as hell within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Applying fears to hopes and hopes to fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still losing when I saw myself to win!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What wretched errors hath my heart committed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the distraction of this madding fever!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O benefit of ill! now I find true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That better is by evil still made better;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ruin’d love, when it is built anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So I return rebuked to my content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-120">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>That you were once unkind befriends me now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for that sorrow which I then did feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Needs must I under my transgression bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless my nerves were brass or hammer’d steel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if you were by my unkindness shaken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I by yours, y’have pass’d a hell of time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To weigh how once I suffer’d in your crime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, that our night of woe might have remember’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon to you, as you to me, then tender’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The humble salve which wounded bosoms fits!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that your trespass now becomes a fee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-121">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis better to be vile than vile esteem’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When not to be receives reproach of being,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the just pleasure lost, which is so deem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not by our feeling but by others’ seeing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For why should others’ false adulterate eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give salutation to my sportive blood?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in their wills count bad what I think good?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, I am that I am, and they that level</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At my abuses reckon up their own:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may be straight, though they themselves be bevel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless this general evil they maintain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All men are bad, and in their badness reign.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-122">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full character’d with lasting memory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which shall above that idle rank remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond all date, even to eternity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or at the least, so long as brain and heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have faculty by nature to subsist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till each to razed oblivion yield his part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thee, thy record never can be miss’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That poor retention could not so much hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore to give them from me was I bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To trust those tables that receive thee more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keep an adjunct to remember thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were to import forgetfulness in me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-123">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy pyramids built up with newer might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They are but dressings Of a former sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thou dost foist upon us that is old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rather make them born to our desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than think that we before have heard them told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy registers and thee I both defy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not wondering at the present nor the past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thy records and what we see doth lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made more or less by thy continual haste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This I do vow and this shall ever be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will be true, despite thy scythe and thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-124">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If my dear love were but the child of state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It might for Fortune’s bastard be unfather’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As subject to Time’s love or to Time’s hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, it was builded far from accident;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the blow of thralled discontent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereto the inviting time our fashion calls:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It fears not policy, that heretic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which works on leases of short-number’d hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all alone stands hugely politic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To this I witness call the fools of time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-125">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Were’t aught to me I bore the canopy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With my extern the outward honouring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or laid great bases for eternity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which proves more short than waste or ruining?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lose all, and more, by paying too much rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For compound sweet forgoing simple savour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take thou my oblation, poor but free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is not mix’d with seconds, knows no art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But mutual render, only me for thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hence, thou suborn’d informer! a true soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When most impeach’d stands least in thy control.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-126">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost hold Time’s fickle glass, his sickle, hour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hast by waning grown, and therein show’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy lovers withering as thy sweet self grow’st;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her audit, though delay’d, answer’d must be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her quietus is to render thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-127">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In the old age black was not counted fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if it were, it bore not beauty’s name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now is black beauty’s successive heir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beauty slander’d with a bastard shame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For since each hand hath put on nature’s power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fairing the foul with art’s false borrow’d face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore my mistress’ eyes are raven black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At such who not born fair, no beauty lack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slandering creation with a false esteem:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every tongue says beauty should look so.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-128">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>How oft, when thou, my music, music play’st,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway’st</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the wood’s boldness by thee blushing stand!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be so tickled, they would change their state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And situation with those dancing chips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making dead wood more blest than living lips.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-129">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The expense of spirit in a waste of shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is lust in action; and till action, lust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is perjured, murderous, bloody full of blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enjoy’d no sooner but despised straight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past reason hunted, and no sooner had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past reason hated, as a swallow’d bait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On purpose laid to make the taker mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mad in pursuit and in possession so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before, a joy proposed; behind a dream.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All this the world well knows; yet none knows well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-130">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coral is far more red, than her lips’ red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have seen roses damask’d, red and white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But no such roses see I in her cheeks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in some perfumes is there more delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love to hear her speak, yet well I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That music hath a far more pleasing sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I grant I never saw a goddess go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mistress when she walks, treads on the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As any she belied with false compare.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-131">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXXI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well thou know’st to my dear doting heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy face hath not the power to make love groan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say they err I dare not be so bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although I swear it to myself alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, to be sure that is not false I swear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand groans but thinking on thy face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One on another’s neck, do witness bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy black is fairest in my judgment’s place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thence this slander, as I think proceeds.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-132">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXXII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have put on black and loving mourners be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And truly not the morning sun of heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor that full star that ushers in the even</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth half that glory to the sober west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those two mourning eyes become thy face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, let it then as well beseem thy heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suit thy pity like in every part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then will I swear beauty herself is black</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all they foul that thy complexion lack.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-133">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXXIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is’t not enough to torture me alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But slave to slavery my sweet’st friend must be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my next self thou harder hast engross’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A torment thrice threefold thus to be cross’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prison my heart in thy steel bosom’s ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then my friend’s heart let my poor heart bail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoe’er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou canst not then use rigour in my gaol:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-134">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXXIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>So, now I have confess’d that he is thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I myself am mortgaged to thy will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself I’ll forfeit, so that other mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt restore, to be my comfort still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou art covetous and he is kind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He learn’d but surety-like to write for me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under that bond that him as fist doth bind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou usurer, that put’st forth all to use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So him I lose through my unkind abuse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-135">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXXV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy “Will,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And “Will” to boot, and “Will” in overplus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than enough am I that vex thee still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thy sweet will making addition thus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall will in others seem right gracious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my will no fair acceptance shine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sea, all water, yet receives rain still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in abundance addeth to his store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So thou, being rich in “Will,” add to thy “Will”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One will of mine, to make thy large “Will” more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think all but one, and me in that one “Will.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-136">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXXVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>If thy soul check thee that I come so near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy “Will,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus far for love my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Will” will fulfil the treasure of thy love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In things of great receipt with case we prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among a number one is reckon’d none:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then in the number let me pass untold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though in thy stores’ account I one must be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That nothing me, a something sweet to thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make but my name thy love, and love that still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then thou lovest me, for my name is “Will.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-137">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXXVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they behold, and see not what they see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They know what beauty is, see where it lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet what the best is take the worst to be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be anchor’d in the bay where all men ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why of eyes’ falsehood hast thou forged hooks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should my heart think that a several plot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which my heart knows the wide world’s common place?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To put fair truth upon so foul a face?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to this false plague are they now transferr’d.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-138">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXXVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When my love swears that she is made of truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do believe her, though I know she lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she might think me some untutor’d youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlearned in the world’s false subtleties.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although she knows my days are past the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On both sides thus is simple truth suppress’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wherefore says she not she is unjust?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wherefore say not I that I am old?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, love’s best habit is in seeming trust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And age in love loves not to have years told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Therefore I lie with her and she with me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in our faults by lies we flatter’d be.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-139">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXXXIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, call not me to justify the wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Use power with power and slay me not by art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me thou lovest elsewhere, but in my sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What need’st thou wound with cunning when thy might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is more than my o’erpress’d defence can bide?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore from my face she turns my foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kill me outright with looks and rid my pain.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-140">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest sorrow lend me words and words express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The manner of my pity-wanting pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I might teach thee wit, better it were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though not to love, yet, love, to tell me so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No news but health from their physicians know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if I should despair, I should grow mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my madness might speak ill of thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may not be so, nor thou belied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-141">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they in thee a thousand errors note;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’tis my heart that loves what they despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in despite of view is pleased to dote;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor are mine ears with thy tongue’s tune delighted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To any sensual feast with thee alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my five wits nor my five senses can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who leaves unsway’d the likeness of a man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy proud heart’s slave and vassal wretch to be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only my plague thus far I count my gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she that makes me sin awards me pain.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-142">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Love is my sin and thy dear virtue hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, but with mine compare thou thine own state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That have profaned their scarlet ornaments</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seal’d false bonds of love as oft as mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Robbed others’ beds’ revenues of their rents.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lovest those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By self-example mayst thou be denied!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-143">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXLIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! as a careful huswife runs to catch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of her feather’d creatures broke away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sets down her babe and makes all swift dispatch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pursuit of the thing she would have stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To follow that which flies before her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not prizing her poor infant’s discontent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So runn’st thou after that which flies from thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And play the mother’s part, kiss me, be kind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So will I pray that thou mayst have thy “Will,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou turn back, and my loud crying still.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-144">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXLIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Two loves I have of comfort and despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which like two spirits do suggest me still:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The better angel is a man right fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worser spirit a woman colour’d ill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To win me soon to hell, my female evil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tempteth my better angel from my side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wooing his purity with her foul pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whether that my angel be turn’d fiend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But being both from me, both to each friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I guess one angel in another’s hell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet this shall I ne’er know, but live in doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till my bad angel fire my good one out.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-145">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXLV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Those lips that Love’s own hand did make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breathed forth the sound that said “I hate”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me that languish’d for her sake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when she saw my woeful state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight in her heart did mercy come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chiding that tongue that ever sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was used in giving gentle doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And taught it thus anew to greet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I hate” she alter’d with an end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That follow’d it as gentle day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth follow night, who like a fiend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From heaven to hell is flown away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I hate” from hate away she threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saved my life, saying “not you.”</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-146">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXLVI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><span class="elision">⋮</span> these rebel powers array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why so large cost, having so short a lease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eat up thy charge? is this thy body’s end?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, soul, live thou upon thy servant’s loss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let that pine to aggravate thy store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within be fed, without be rich no more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So shall thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Death once dead, there’s no more dying then.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-147">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXLVII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My love is as a fever, longing still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that which longer nurseth the disease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The uncertain sickly appetite to please.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My reason, the physician to my love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath left me, and I desperate now approve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desire is death, which physic did except.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past cure I am, now reason is past care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My thoughts and my discourse as madmen’s are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At random from the truth vainly express’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I have sworn thee fair and thought thee bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-148">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXLVIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O me, what eyes hath Love put in my head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which have no correspondence with true sight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That censures falsely what they see aright?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What means the world to say it is not so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it be not, then love doth well denote</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s eye is not so true as all men’s “No.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How can it? O, how can Love’s eye be true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is so vex’d with watching and with tears?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No marvel then, though I mistake my view;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun itself sees not, till heaven clears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O cunning Love! with tears thou keep’st me blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-149">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CXLIX</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I against myself with thee partake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do I not think on thee, when I forgot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am of myself, all tyrant, for thy sake?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hateth thee that I do call my friend?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On whom frown’st thou that I do fawn upon?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, if thou lour’st on me do I not spend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revenge upon myself with present moan?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What merit do I in myself respect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is so proud thy service to despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When all my best doth worship thy defect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those that can see thou lovest, and I am blind.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-150">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CL</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O, from what power hast thou this powerful might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With insufficiency my heart to sway?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make me give the lie to my true sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the very refuse of thy deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is such strength and warrantise of skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who taught thee how to make me love thee more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more I hear and see just cause of hate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, though I love what others do abhor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thy unworthiness raised love in me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More worthy I to be beloved of thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-151">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CLI</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Love is too young to know what conscience is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, thou betraying me, I do betray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My nobler part to my gross body’s treason;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul doth tell my body that he may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, rising at thy name, doth point out thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is contented thy poor drudge to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No want of conscience hold it that I call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her “love” for whose dear love I rise and fall.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-152">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CLII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In loving thee thou know’st I am forsworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vowing new hate after new love bearing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But why of two oaths’ breach do I accuse thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I break twenty? I am perjured most;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all my honest faith in thee is lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or made them swear against the thing they see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I have sworn thee fair; more perjured I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To swear against the truth so foul a lie!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-153">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CLIII</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Cupid laid by his brand, and fell asleep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A maid of Dian’s this advantage found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which borrow’d from this holy fire of Love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dateless lively heat, still to endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grew a seeting bath, which yet men prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at my mistress’ eye Love’s brand new-fired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thither hied, a sad distemper’d guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But found no cure: the bath for my help lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Cupid got new fire⁠—my mistress’ eyes.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-154">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">CLIV</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The little Love-god lying once asleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst many nymphs that vow’d chaste life to keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fairest votary took up that fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which many legions of true hearts had warm’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so the general of hot desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarm’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This brand she quenched in a cool well by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which from Love’s fire took heat perpetual,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Growing a bath and healthful remedy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For men diseased; but I, my mistress’ thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came there for cure, and this by that I prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love’s fire heats water, water cools not love.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
		<article id="a-lovers-complaint" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Lover’s Complaint</h2>
			<p>
				<span>From off a hill whose concave womb reworded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A plaintful story from a sistering vale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My spirits to attend this double voice accorded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down I laid to list the sad-tuned tale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere long espied a fickle maid full pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tearing of papers, breaking rings a-twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Storming her world with sorrow’s wind and rain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon her head a platted hive of straw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which fortified her visage from the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon the thought might think sometime it saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carcass of a beauty spent and done:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time had not scythed all that youth begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor youth all quit; but, spite of heaven’s fell rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some beauty peep’d through lattice of sear’d age.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Oft did she heave her napkin to her eyne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which on it had conceited characters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laund’ring the silken figures in the brine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That seasoned woe had pelleted in tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And often reading what contents it bears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As often shrieking undistinguish’d woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In clamours of all size, both high and low.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sometimes her levell’d eyes their carriage ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they did batt’ry to the spheres intend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometime diverted their poor balls are tied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To th’orbed earth; sometimes they do extend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their view right on; anon their gazes lend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To every place at once, and nowhere fix’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mind and sight distractedly commix’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Her hair, nor loose nor tied in formal plat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proclaim’d in her a careless hand of pride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For some untuck’d descended her sheav’d hat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hanging her pale and pined cheek beside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some in her threaden fillet still did bide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, true to bondage, would not break from thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though slackly braided in loose negligence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A thousand favours from a maund she drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of amber, crystal, and of beaded jet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which one by one she in a river threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon whose weeping margent she was set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like usury applying wet to wet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or monarch’s hands that lets not bounty fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where want cries some, but where excess begs all.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of folded schedules had she many a one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which she perused, sigh’d, tore, and gave the flood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crack’d many a ring of posied gold and bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bidding them find their sepulchres in mud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found yet mo letters sadly penn’d in blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sleided silk feat and affectedly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enswathed, and seal’d to curious secrecy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These often bathed she in her fluxive eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And often kiss’d, and often ’gan to tear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried, “O false blood, thou register of lies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What unapproved witness dost thou bear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ink would have seem’d more black and damned here!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This said, in top of rage the lines she rents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Big discontent so breaking their contents.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A reverend man that grazed his cattle nigh⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometime a blusterer, that the ruffle knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of court, of city, and had let go by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swiftest hours, observed as they flew⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towards this afflicted fancy fastly drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, privileged by age, desires to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In brief the grounds and motives of her woe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So slides he down upon his grained bat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And comely-distant sits he by her side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he again desires her, being sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her grievance with his hearing to divide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If that from him there may be aught applied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which may her suffering ecstasy assuage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis promised in the charity of age.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Father,” she says, “though in me you behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The injury of many a blasting hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let it not tell your judgement I am old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not age, but sorrow, over me hath power:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I might as yet have been a spreading flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh to myself, if I had self-applied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love to myself and to no love beside.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But, woe is me! too early I attended</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A youthful suit⁠—it was to gain my grace⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one by nature’s outwards so commended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That maidens’ eyes stuck over all his face:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love lack’d a dwelling, and made him her place;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when in his fair parts she did abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was new lodged and newly deified.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“His browny locks did hang in crooked curls;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every light occasion of the wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his lips their silken parcels hurls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s sweet to do, to do will aptly find:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each eye that saw him did enchant the mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For on his visage was in little drawn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What largeness thinks in Paradise was sawn.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Small show of man was yet upon his chin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His phoenix down began but to appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like unshorn velvet on that termless skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose bare out-bragg’d the web it seem’d to wear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet show’d his visage by that cost more dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nice affections wavering stood in doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If best were as it was, or best without.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“His qualities were beauteous as his form,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For maiden-tongued he was, and thereof free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet if men moved him, was he such a storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As oft ’twixt May and April is to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When winds breathe sweet, unruly though they be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rudeness so with his authorized youth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did livery falseness in a pride of truth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Well could he ride, and often men would say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘That horse his mettle from his rider takes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud of subjection, noble by the sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What rounds, what bounds, what course, what stop he makes!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And controversy hence a question takes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether the horse by him became his deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or he his manage by the well-doing steed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But quickly on this side the verdict went:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His real habitude gave life and grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To appertainings and to ornament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accomplish’d in himself, not in his case:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All aids, themselves made fairer by their place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came for additions; yet their purposed trim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pieced not his grace, but were all graced by him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So on the tip of his subduing tongue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All kind of arguments and question deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All replication prompt, and reason strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his advantage still did wake and sleep:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had the dialect and different skill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catching all passions in his craft of will:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That he did in the general bosom reign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of young, of old; and sexes both enchanted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dwell with him in thoughts, or to remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In personal duty, following where he haunted:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consents bewitch’d, ere he desire, have granted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dialogued for him what he would say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask’d their own wills, and made their wills obey.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Many there were that did his picture get,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To serve their eyes, and in it put their mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like fools that in th’ imagination set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The goodly objects which abroad they find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lands and mansions, theirs in thought assign’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And labouring in moe pleasures to bestow them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the true gouty landlord which doth owe them:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So many have, that never touch’d his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweetly supposed them mistress of his heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My woeful self, that did in freedom stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And was my own fee-simple, not in part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What with his art in youth, and youth in art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threw my affections in his charmed power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reserved the stalk and gave him all my flower.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yet did I not, as some my equals did,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Demand of him, nor being desired yielded;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finding myself in honour so forbid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With safest distance I mine honour shielded:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Experience for me many bulwarks builded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of proofs new-bleeding, which remain’d the foil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this false jewel, and his amorous spoil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But ah, who ever shunn’d by precedent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The destined ill she must herself assay?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or forceed examples ’gainst her own content,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To put the by-past perils in her way?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counsel may stop a while what will not stay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when we rage, advice is often seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By blunting us to make our wills more keen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nor gives it satisfaction to our blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we must curb it upon others’ proof;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be forbode the sweets that seems so good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fear of harms that preach in our behoof.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O appetite, from judgement stand aloof!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one a palate hath that needs will taste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Reason weep, and cry, ‘It is thy last.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For further I could say, ‘This man’s untrue,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knew the patterns of his foul beguiling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard where his plants in others’ orchards grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw how deceits were gilded in his smiling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew vows were ever brokers to defiling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought characters and words merely but art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bastards of his foul adulterate heart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And long upon these terms I held my city,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till thus he ’gan besiege me: ‘Gentle maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have of my suffering youth some feeling pity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be not of my holy vows afraid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s to ye sworn, to none was ever said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For feasts of love I have been call’d unto,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till now did ne’er invite, nor never woo.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘All my offences that abroad you see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are errors of the blood, none of the mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love made them not: with acture they may be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where neither party is nor true nor kind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sought their shame that so their shame did find;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so much less of shame in me remains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By how much of me their reproach contains.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Among the many that mine eyes have seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not one whose flame my heart so much as warm’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or my affection put to the smallest teen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or any of my leisures ever charm’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harm have I done to them, but ne’er was harm’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept hearts in liveries, but mine own was free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reign’d commanding in his monarchy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Look here, what tributes wounded fancies sent me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of paled pearls and rubies red as blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Figuring that they their passions likewise lent me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of grief and blushes, aptly understood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bloodless white and the encrimson’d mood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Effects of terror and dear modesty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encamp’d in hearts, but fighting outwardly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘And, lo, behold these talents of their hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With twisted metal amorously empleach’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have received from many a several fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their kind acceptance weepingly beseech’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the annexions of fair gems enrich’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deep-brain’d sonnets that did amplify</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each stone’s dear nature, worth, and quality.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘The diamond⁠—why, ’twas beautiful and hard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereto his invised properties did tend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The deep green emerald, in whose fresh regard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weak sights their sickly radiance do amend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heaven-hued sapphire and the opal blend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With objects manifold: each several stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wit well blazon’d, smiled or made some moan.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Lo, all these trophies of affections hot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pensived and subdued desires the tender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature hath charged me that I hoard them not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yield them up where I myself must render,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is, to you, my origin and ender;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For these, of force, must your oblations be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I their altar, you empatron me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O, then, advance of yours that phraseless hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose white weighs down the airy scale of praise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take all these similes to your own command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hallow’d with sighs that burning lungs did raise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What me your minister, for you obeys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Works under you; and to your audit comes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their distract parcels in combined sums.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Lo, this device was sent me from a nun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or sister sanctified, of holiest note;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which late her noble suit in court did shun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose rarest havings made the blossoms dote;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she was sought by spirits of richest coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But kept cold distance, and did thence remove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spend her living in eternal love.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘But, O my sweet, what labour is’t to leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thing we have not, mastering what not strives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playing the place which did no form receive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playing patient sports in unconstrained gyves?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She that her fame so to herself contrives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scars of battle ’scapeth by the flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes her absence valiant, not her might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘O, pardon me, in that my boast is true:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The accident which brought me to her eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the moment did her force subdue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now she would the caged cloister fly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Religious love put out Religion’s eye:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to be tempted, would she be immured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, to tempt, all liberty procured.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘How mighty then you are, O, hear me tell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The broken bosoms that to me belong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have emptied all their fountains in my well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mine I pour your ocean all among:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I strong o’er them, and you o’er me being strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must for your victory us all congest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As compound love to physic your cold breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘My parts had power to charm a sacred nun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, disciplined, ay, dieted in grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believed her eyes when they to assail begun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All vows and consecrations giving place:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O most potential love! vow, bond, nor space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thee hath neither sting, knot, nor confine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thou art all, and all things else are thine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘When thou impressest, what are precepts worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of stale example? When thou wilt inflame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How coldly those impediments stand forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wealth, of filial fear, law, kindred, fame!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love’s arms are peace, ’gainst rule, ’gainst sense, ’gainst shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sweetens, in the suffering pangs it bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The aloes of all forces, shocks, and fears.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ‘Now all these hearts that do on mine depend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling it break, with bleeding groans they pine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And supplicant their sighs to your extend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leave the battery that you make ’gainst mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lending soft audience to my sweet design,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And credent soul to that strong-bonded oath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shall prefer and undertake my troth.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This said, his watery eyes he did dismount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose sights till then were levell’d on my face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each cheek a river running from a fount</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With brinish current downward flow’d apace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, how the channel to the stream gave grace!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who glazed with crystal gate the glowing roses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That flame through water which their hue encloses.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O father, what a hell of witchcraft lies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the small orb of one particular tear!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with the inundation of the eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What rocky heart to water will not wear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What breast so cold that is not warmed here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O cleft effect! cold modesty, hot wrath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both fire from hence and chill extincture hath.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For, lo, his passion, but an art of craft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even there resolved my reason into tears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There my white stole of chastity I daff’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook off my sober guards and civil fears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appear to him, as he to me appears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All melting; though our drops this difference bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His poison’d me, and mine did him restore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“In him a plenitude of subtle matter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Applied to cautels, all strange forms receives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of burning blushes, or of weeping water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or swooning paleness; and he takes and leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In either’s aptness, as it best deceives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To blush at speeches rank, to weep at woes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That not a heart which in his level came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could ’scape the hail of his all-hurting aim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Showing fair nature is both kind and tame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, veil’d in them, did win whom he would maim:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the thing he sought he would exclaim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he most burn’d in heart-wish’d luxury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He preach’d pure maid, and prais’d cold chastity.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus merely with the garment of a Grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The naked and concealed fiend he cover’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That th’ unexperient gave the tempter place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which like a cherubin above them hover’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, young and simple, would not be so lover’d?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay me! I fell; and yet do question make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I should do again for such a sake.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O, that infected moisture of his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, that false fire which in his cheek so glow’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, that forced thunder from his heart did fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, that sad breath his spongy lungs bestow’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, all that borrow’d motion seeming owed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would yet again betray the fore-betray’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And new pervert a reconciled maid!”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
